
=encoding utf8

=head1 Title

DRAFT: Synopsis 32: Setting Library - Miscellaneous Scalars

=head1 Version

 Author:        Rod Adams <rod@rodadams.net>
 Maintainer:    Larry Wall <larry@wall.org>
 Contributions: Aaron Sherman <ajs@ajs.com>
                Mark Stosberg <mark@summersault.com>
                Carl Mäsak <cmasak@gmail.com>
                Moritz Lenz <moritz@faui2k3.org>
       	       	Tim Nelson <wayland@wayland.id.au>
 Date:          19 Mar 2009 extracted from S29-functions.pod
 Last Modified: 19 Feb 2009
 Version:       1

The document is a draft.

If you read the HTML version, it is generated from the pod in the pugs 
repository under /docs/Perl6/Spec/S32-setting-library/Miscellaneous-scalars.pod 
so edit it there in the SVN repository if you would like to make changes.

=head1 Scalar

B<API document>: L<Scalar>

C<Scalar> provides the basic tools for operating on undifferentiated
scalar variables. All of the following are exported by default.

=over

=item defined

  our Bool multi defined ( Any $thing )
  our Bool multi defined ( Any $thing, ::role )

C<defined> returns true if the parameter has a value and that value is
not the undefined value (per C<undef>), otherwise false is returned.

Same as Perl 5, only takes extra optional argument to ask if value is defined
with respect to a particular role:

  defined($x, SomeRole);

A value may be defined according to one role and undefined according to another.
Without the extra argument, defaults to the definition of defined supplied by
the type of the object.

=item undefine

  our multi undefine( Any $thing )

Takes any variable as a parameter and attempts to "remove" its
definition. For simple scalar variables this means assigning
the undefined value to the variable. For objects, this is equivalent
to invoking their undefine method. For arrays, hashes and other
complex data, this might require emptying the structures associated
with the object.

In all cases, calling C<undefine> on a variable
should place the object in the same state as if it was just
declared.

=item undef

  constant Scalar Scalar::undef

Returns the undefined scalar object. C<undef> has no value at
all, but for historical compatibility, it will numify to C<0>
and stringify to the empty string, potentially generating a
warning in doing so. There are two ways to determine if a
value equal to undef: the C<defined> function (or method) can
be called or the C<//> (or C<orelse>) operator can be used.

C<undef> is also considered to be false in a boolean context.
Such a conversion does not generate a warning.

Perl 5's unary C<undef> function is renamed C<undefine> to avoid
confusion with the value C<undef> (which is always 0-ary now).

=back

=head1 Additions

Please post errors and feedback to perl6-language.  If you are making
a general laundry list, please separate messages by topic.



