=encoding utf8

=head1 TITLE

Synopsis 4: Blocks and Statements

=head1 VERSION

    Created: 19 Aug 2004

    Last Modified: 8 Aug 2015
    Version: 139

This document summarizes Apocalypse 4, which covers the block and
statement syntax of Perl.

=head1 The Relationship of Lexical and Dynamic Scopes

Control flow is a dynamic feature of all computer programming languages, but
languages differ in the extent to which control flow is attached to
declarative features of the language, which are often known as "static" or
"lexical".  We use the phrase "lexical scoping" in its industry-standard
meaning to indicate those blocks that surround the current textual location.
More abstractly, any declarations associated with those textual blocks are
also considered to be part of the lexical scope, and this is where the term
earns the "lexical" part of its name, in the sense that lexical scoping
actually does define the "lexicon" for the current chunk of code, insofar as
the definitions of variables and routines create a local domain-specific
language.

We also use the term "dynamic scoping" in the standard fashion to indicate
the nested call frames that are created and destroyed every time a function
or method is called.  In most interesting programs the dynamic scopes are
nested quite differently from the lexical scopes, so it's important to
distinguish carefully which kind of scoping we're talking about.

Further compounding the difficulty is that every dynamic scope's outer call
frame is associated with a lexical scope somewhere, so you can't just
consider one kind of scoping or the other in isolation.  Many constructs
define a particular interplay of lexical and dynamic features.  For
instance, unlike normal lexically scope variables, dynamic variables search
up the dynamic call stack for a variable of a particular name, but at each
"stop" along the way, they are actually looking in the lexical "pad"
associated with that particular dynamic scope's call frame.

In Perl 6, control flow is designed to do what the user expects most of the
time, but this implies that we must consider the declarative nature of
labels and blocks and combine those with the dynamic nature of the call
stack.  For instance, a C<return> statement always returns from the
lexically scoped subroutine that surrounds it.  But to do that, it may
eventually have to peel back any number of layers of dynamic call frames
internal to the subroutine's current call frame.  The lexical scope supplies
the declared target for the dynamic operation.  There does not seem to be a
prevailing term in the industry for this, so we've coined the term
I<lexotic> to refer to these strange operations that perform a dynamic
operation with a lexical target in mind.  Lexotic operators in Perl 6
include:

    return
    next
    last
    redo
    goto

Some of these operators also fall back to a purely dynamic interpretation if
the lexotic interpretation doesn't work.  For instance, C<next> with a label
will prefer to exit a loop lexotically, but if there is no loop with an
appropriate label in the lexical context, it will then scan upward
dynamically through the call frames for any loop with the appropriate label,
even though that loop will not be lexically visible.  (C<next> without a
label is purely dynamic.)  Lexotic and dynamic control flow is implemented
by a system of control exceptions.  For the lexotic return of C<next>, the
control exception will contain the identity of the loop scope to be exited
(since the label was already "used up" to discover that identity), but for
the dynamic fallback, the exception will contain only the loop label to be
matched dynamically.  See L</Control Exceptions> below.

The C<redo> operator, as a variant of C<goto>, directly transfers control to
the first statement of the lexotically enclosed loop.  Essentially, the
compiler turns it into a C<goto> with an implicitly generated (secret) label
on that first statement.  In order to know when that implicit label must be
generated, we restrict C<redo> to the current outer lexical scope.  It may
not be used dynamically.  (If you find yourself wanting the dynamic variant,
please use C<goto> with an explicit label instead, so the compiler can know
to pessimize any unrolling of that loop.)

=head1 The Relationship of Blocks and Declarations

Every block is a closure.  (That is, in the abstract, they're all anonymous
subroutines that take a snapshot of their lexical environment.) How a block
is invoked and how its results are used are matters of context, but closures
all work the same on the inside.

Blocks are delimited by curlies, or by the beginning and end of the current
compilation unit (either the current file or the current C<EVAL> string).
Unlike in Perl 5, there are (by policy) no implicit blocks around standard
control structures.  (You could write a macro that violates this, but resist
the urge.)  Variables that mediate between an outer statement and an inner
block (such as loop variables) should generally be declared as formal
parameters to that block.  There are three ways to declare formal parameters
to a closure.

    $func = sub ($a, $b) { .print if $a eq $b };  # standard sub declaration
    $func = -> $a, $b { .print if $a eq $b };     # a "pointy" block
    $func = { .print if $^a eq $^b }              # placeholder arguments

A bare closure (except the block associated with a conditional statement)
without placeholder arguments that uses C<$_> (either explicitly or
implicitly) is treated as though C<$_> were a formal parameter:

    $func = { .print if $_ };   # Same as: $func = <-> $_ { .print if $_ };
    $func("printme");

In any case, all formal parameters are the equivalent of C<my> variables
within the block.  See S06 for more on function parameters.

Except for such formal parameter declarations, all lexically scoped
declarations are visible from the point of declaration to the end of the
enclosing block.  Period.  Lexicals may not "leak" from a block to any other
external scope (at least, not without some explicit aliasing action on the
part of the block, such as exportation of a symbol from a module).  The
"point of declaration" is the moment the compiler sees "C<my $foo>", not the
end of the statement as in Perl 5, so

    my $x = $x;

will no longer see the value of the outer C<$x>; you'll need to say either

    my $x = $OUTER::x;

or

    my $x = OUTER::<$x>;

instead.

If you declare a lexical twice in the same scope, it is the same lexical:

    my $x;
    my $x;

By default the second declaration will get a compiler warning.  You may
suppress this by modifying the first declaration with C<proto>:

    my proto $x;
    ...
    while my $x = @x.shift {...}              # no warning
    while my $x = @x.shift {...}              # no warning

If you've referred to C<$x> prior to the first declaration, and the compiler
tentatively bound it to C<$OUTER::x>, then it's an error to declare it, and
the compiler is required to complain at that point.  If such use can't be
detected because it is hidden in an C<EVAL>, then it is erroneous, since the
C<EVAL()> compiler might bind to either C<$OUTER::x> or the subsequently
declared "C<my $x>".

As in Perl 5, "C<our $foo>" introduces a lexically scoped alias for a
variable in the current package.

The new C<constant> declarator introduces a compile-time constant, either a
variable or named value, which may be initialized with a pseudo-assignment:

    constant $pi of Int = 3;
    my Num constant π = atan2(2,2) * 4;

The initializing expression is evaluated at C<BEGIN> time.  Constants (and
enums) default to C<our> scoping so they can be accessed from outside the
package.

There is a new C<state> declarator that introduces a lexically scoped
variable like C<my> does, but with a lifetime that persists for the life of
the closure, so that it keeps its value from the end of one call to the
beginning of the next.  Separate clones of the closure get separate state
variables.  However, recursive calls to the same clone use the same state
variable.

Perl 5's "C<local>" function has been renamed to C<temp> to better reflect
what it does.  There is also a C<let> prefix operator that sets a
hypothetical value.  It works exactly like C<temp>, except that the value
will be restored only if the current block exits unsuccessfully.  (See
Definition of Success below for more.)  C<temp> and C<let> temporize or
hypotheticalize the value or the variable depending on whether you do
assignment or binding.  One other difference from Perl 5 is that the default
is not to undefine a variable.  So

    temp $x;

causes C<$x> to start with its current value.  Use

    undefine temp $x;

to get the Perl 5 behavior.

Note that temporizations that are undone upon scope exit must be prepared to
be redone if a continuation within that scope is taken.

=head1 The Relationship of Blocks and Statements

In the absence of explicit control flow terminating the block early, the
return value of a block is the value of its final statement.  This is
defined as the textually last statement of its top-level list of statements;
any statements embedded within those top-level statements are in their own
lower-level list of statements and, while they may be a final statement in
their subscope, they're not considered the final statement of the outer
block in question.

This is subtly different from Perl 5's behavior, which was to return the
value of the last expression evaluated, even if that expression was just a
conditional.  Unlike in Perl 5, if a final statement in Perl 6 is a
conditional that does not execute any of its branches, it doesn't matter
what the value of the conditional is, the value of that conditional
statement is always C<()>.  If there are no statements in the block at all,
the result is also C<()>.

=head1 Statement-ending blocks

A line ending with a closing brace "C<}>", followed by nothing but
whitespace or comments, will terminate a statement if an end of statement
can occur there.  That is, these two statements are equivalent:

    my $x = sub { 3 }
    my $x = sub { 3 };

Since bracketed expressions consider their insides to be statements, this
works out consistently even where you might expect problems:

    my $x = [
        sub { 3 },  # this comma is not optional
        sub { 3 }   # the statement inside [] terminates here
    ];

    my $hash = {
        1 => { 2 => 3, 4 => 5 },  # OK
        2 => { 6 => 7, 8 => 9 }   # OK, terminates inner statement
    };

Because subroutine declarations are expressions, not statements, this is now
invalid:

    sub f { 3 } sub g { 3 }     # two terms occur in a row

But these two are valid:

    sub f { 3 }; sub g { 3 };
    sub f { 3 }; sub g { 3 }    # the trailing semicolon is optional

Though certain control statements could conceivably be parsed in a
self-contained way, for visual consistency all statement-terminating blocks
that end in the middle of a line I<must> be terminated by semicolon unless
they are naturally terminated by some other statement terminator:

    while yin() { yang() }  say "done";      # ILLEGAL
    while yin() { yang() }; say "done";      # okay, explicit semicolon
    @yy := [ while yin() { yang() } ];       # okay within outer [...]
    while yin() { yang() } ==> sort          # okay, ==> separates statements

=head1 Conditional statements
X<if>X<unless>

The C<if> and C<unless> statements work much as they do in Perl 5.  However,
you may omit the parentheses on the conditional:

    if $foo == 123 {
        ...
    }
    elsif $foo == 321 {
        ...
    }
    else {
        ...
    }

The result of a conditional statement is the result of the block chosen to
execute.  If the conditional does not execute any branch, the return value
is C<()>.

The C<unless> statement does not allow an C<elsif> or C<else> in Perl 6.

The value of the conditional expression may be optionally bound to a closure
parameter:

    if    testa() -> $a { say $a }
    elsif testb() -> $b { say $b }
    else          -> $b { say $b }

Note that the value being evaluated for truth and subsequently bound is not
necessarily a value of type C<Bool>.  (All normal types in Perl may be
evaluated for truth.  In fact, this construct would be relatively useless if
you could bind only boolean values as parameters, since within the closure
you already know whether it evaluated to true or false.)  Binding within an
C<else> automatically binds the value tested by the previous C<if> or
C<elsif>, which, while known to be false, might nevertheless be an
I<interesting> value of false.  (By similar reasoning, an C<unless> allows
binding of a false parameter.)

An explicit placeholder may also be used:

    if blahblah() { return $^it }

However, use of C<$_> with a conditional or conditionally repeating
statement's block is I<not> considered sufficiently explicit to turn a 0-ary
block into a 1-ary function, so all these methods use the same invocant:

    if .haste { .waste }
    while .haste { .waste }

(Contrast with a non-conditional statement such as:

    for .haste { .waste }

where each call to the block would bind a new invocant for the C<.waste>
method, each of which is likely different from the original invocant to the
C<.haste> method.)

Conditional statement modifiers work as in Perl 5.  So do the implicit
conditionals implied by short-circuit operators.  Note though that the
contents of parens or brackets is parsed as a statement, so you can say:

    @x = 41, (42 if $answer), 43;

and that is equivalent to:

    @x = 41, ($answer ?? 42 !! Slip), 43

(Only a single statement is allowed inside parens or brackets; otherwise
it will be interpreted as a LoL composer.
See L<S02/"Multidimensional slices and parcels">.)

=head2 The C<with> and C<without> statements

The C<with> statement is like C<if> but tests for definedness rather than
truth.  In addition, it topicalizes on the condition, much like C<given>:

    with "abc".index("a") { .say }      # prints 0

These may be cascaded:

    with   $s.index("a") { "Found a at $_" }
    orwith $s.index("b") { "Found b at $_" }
    orwith $s.index("c") { "Found c at $_" }
    else                 { "Didn't find a, b or c" }

You may intermix C<if>-based and C<with>-based clauses.

As with C<unless>, you may use C<without> to check for undefinedness,
but you may not add an C<else> clause:

    without $answer { fail "Got: $_" }

There are also C<with> and C<without> statement modifiers:

    return 42 with $answer;
    .throw without $answer;

=head1 Loop statements

Looping statement modifiers are the same as in Perl 5 except that, for ease
of writing list comprehensions, a looping statement modifier is allowed to
contain a single conditional statement modifier:

    @evens = ($_ * 2 if .odd for 0..100);

Loop modifiers C<next>, C<last>, and C<redo> also work much as in Perl 5.
However, the labeled forms can use method call syntax: C<LABEL.next>, etc.
The C<.next> and C<.last> methods take an optional argument giving the final
value of that loop iteration.  So the old C<next LINE> syntax is still
allowed but really does something like C<LINE.next(())> underneath.  Any
block object can be used, not just labels, so to return a value from this
iteration of the current block you can say:

    &?BLOCK.next($retval);

[Conjecture: a bare C<next($retval)> function could be taught to do the
same, as long as C<$retval> isn't a loop label.  Presumably multiple
dispatch could sort this out.]

With a target object or label, loop modifiers search lexotically for the
scope to modify.  Without a target, however, they are purely dynamic, and
choose the innermost dynamic loop, which may well be a C<map> or other
implicitly looping function, including user-defined functions.

There is no longer a C<continue> block.  Instead, use a C<NEXT> block within
the body of the loop.  See below.

The value of a loop statement is the list of values from each iteration.
Each iteration's value is returned as a single "argument" object.  See
L<S02> for a long definition of argument, but in short, it's either an
ordinary object or a parcel containing multiple values.

Normal flat list context ignores parcel boundaries and flattens the list.

Iterations that return C<()> (such as by calling C<next> with no extra
return arguments) return that C<()> as the next value, which will therefore
disappear when interpolated in flat context, but will interpolate an empty
C<Parcel> into slice context.

For finer-grained control of which iterations return values, use C<gather>
and C<take>.

=head2 The C<while> and C<until> statements
X<while>X<until>

The C<while> and C<until> statements work as in Perl 5, except that you may
leave out the parentheses around the conditional:

    while $bar < 100 {
        ...
    }

As with conditionals, you may optionally bind the result of the conditional
expression to a parameter of the block:

    while something() -> $thing {
        ...
    }

    while something() { ... $^thing ... }

Nothing is ever bound implicitly, however, and many conditionals would
simply bind C<True> or C<False> in an uninteresting fashion.  This mechanism
is really only good for objects that know how to return a boolean value and
still remain themselves.  In general, for most iterated solutions you should
consider using a C<for> loop instead (see below).  In particular, we now
generally use C<for> to iterate filehandles.

=head2 The C<repeat> statement
X<repeat>X<while>X<next>X<last>X<redo>

Unlike in Perl 5, applying a statement modifier to a C<do> block is
specifically disallowed:

    do {
        ...
    } while $x < 10;    # ILLEGAL

Instead, you should write the more Pascal-like C<repeat> loop:

    repeat {
        ...
    } while $x < 10;

or equivalently:

    repeat {
        ...
    } until $x >= 10;

Unlike Perl 5's C<do-while> loop, this is a real loop block now, so C<next>,
C<last>, and C<redo> work as expected.  The loop conditional on a C<repeat>
block is required, so it will be recognized even if you put it on a line by
its own:

    repeat
    {
        ...
    }
    while $x < 10;

However, that's likely to be visually confused with a following C<while>
loop at the best of times, so it's also allowed to put the loop conditional
at the front, with the same meaning. (The C<repeat> keyword forces the
conditional to be evaluated at the end of the loop, so it's still C's
C<do-while> semantics.)  Therefore, even under GNU style rules, the previous
example may be rewritten into a very clear:

    repeat while $x < 10
      {
        ...
      }

or equivalently:

    repeat until $x >= 10
      {
        ...
      }

As with an ordinary C<while>, you may optionally bind the result of the
conditional expression to a parameter of the block:

    repeat -> $thing {
        ...
    } while something();

or

    repeat while something() -> $thing {
        ...
    }

Since the loop executes once before evaluating the condition, the bound
parameter will be undefined that first time through the loop.

=head2 The general loop statement
X<loop>

The C<loop> statement is the C-style C<for> loop in disguise:

    loop ($i = 0; $i < 10; $i++) {
        ...
    }

As in C, the parentheses are required if you supply the 3-part spec;
however, the 3-part loop spec may be entirely omitted to write an infinite
loop.  That is,

    loop {...}

is equivalent to the C-ish idiom:

    loop (;;) {...}

=head2 The C<for> statement
X<for>X<zip>X<Z>X<STDIN>X<$*IN>X<lines>

There is no C<foreach> statement any more. It's always spelled C<for> in
Perl 6, so it always takes a list as an argument:

    for @foo { .print }

As mentioned earlier, the loop variable is named by passing a parameter to
the closure:

    for @foo -> $item { print $item }

Multiple parameters may be passed, in which case the list is traversed more
than one element at a time:

    for %hash.kv -> $key, $value { print "$key => $value\n" }

To process two arrays in parallel use the C<zip> function to generate a list
that can be bound to the corresponding number of parameters:

    for zip(@a;@b) -> $a, $b { print "[$a, $b]\n" }
    for @a Z @b -> $a, $b { print "[$a, $b]\n" }        # same thing

The list is evaluated lazily by default, so instead of using a C<while> to
read a file a line at a time as you would in Perl 5:

    while (my $line = <STDIN>) {...}

in Perl 6 you should use a C<for> instead:

    for $*IN.lines -> $line {...}

This has the added benefit of limiting the scope of the C<$line> parameter
to the block it's bound to.  (The C<while>'s declaration of C<$line>
continues to be visible past the end of the block.  Remember, no implicit
block scopes.)  It is also possible to write

    while $*IN.get -> $line {...}

However, this is likely to fail on autochomped filehandles, so use the
C<for> loop instead.

Note also that Perl 5's special rule causing

    while (<>) {...}

to automatically assign to C<$_> is not carried over to Perl 6.  That should
now be written:

    for lines() {...}

which is short for

    for lines($*ARGFILES) {...}

Arguments bound to the formal parameters of a pointy block are by default
readonly within the block.  You can declare a parameter read/write by
including the "C<is rw>" trait.  The following treats every other value in
C<@values> as modifiable:

    for @values -> $even is rw, $odd { ... }

In the case where you want all your parameters to default to C<rw>, you may
use the visually suggestive double-ended arrow to indicate that values flow
both ways:

    for @values <-> $even, $odd { ... }

This is equivalent to

    for @values -> $even is rw, $odd is rw { ... }

If you rely on C<$_> as the implicit parameter to a block, then C<$_> is
considered read/write by default.  That is, the construct:

    for @foo {...}

is actually short for:

    for @foo <-> $_ {...}

so you can modify the current list element in that case.

When used as statement modifiers on implicit blocks (thunks), C<for> and
C<given> privately temporize the current value of C<$_> for the left side of
the statement and restore the original value at loop exit:

    $_ = 42;
    .say             # 42
    .say for 1,2,3;  # 1,2,3
    .say;            # 42

The previous value of C<$_> is not available within the loop.  If you want
it to be available, you must rewrite it as an explicit block using curlies:

    { say OUTER::<$_>, $_ } for 1,2,3;  # 421,422,423

No temporization is necessary with the explicit form since C<$_> is a formal
parameter to the block.  Likewise, temporization is never needed for C<<
statement_control:<for> >> because it always calls a closure.

=head2 The do-once loop

In Perl 5, a bare block is deemed to be a do-once loop.  In Perl 6, the bare
block is not a do-once.  Instead C<do {...}> is the do-once loop (which is
another reason you can't put a statement modifier on it; use C<repeat> for a
test-at-the-end loop).

For any statement, prefixing with a C<do> allows you to return the value of
that statement and use it in an expression:

    $x = do if $a { $b } else { $c };

This construct only allows you to attach a single statement to the end of an
expression.  If you want to continue the expression after the statement, or
if you want to attach multiple statements, you must either use the curly
form or surround the entire expression in brackets of some sort:

    @primesquares = (do $_ if .is-prime for 1..100) »**» 2;

Since a bare expression may be used as a statement, you may use C<do> on an
expression, but its only effect is to function as an unmatched left
parenthesis, much like the C<$> operator in Haskell.  That is, precedence
decisions do not cross a C<do> boundary, and the missing "right paren" is
assumed at the next statement terminator or unmatched bracket.  A C<do> is
unnecessary immediately after any opening bracket as the syntax inside
brackets expects a statement, so the above can in fact be written:

    @primesquares = ($_ if .is-prime for 1..100) »**» 2;

This basically gives us list comprehensions as rvalue expressions:

    (for 1..100 { $_ if .is-prime }).say

Another consequence of this is that any block just inside a left parenthesis
is immediately called like a bare block, so a multidimensional list
comprehension may be written using a block with multiple parameters fed by a
C<for> modifier:

    @names = (-> $name, $num { "$name.$num" } for 'a'..'zzz' X 1..100);

or equivalently, using placeholders:

    @names = ({ "$^name.$^num" } for 'a'..'zzz' X 1..100);

Since C<do> is defined as going in front of a statement, it follows that it
can always be followed by a statement label.  This is particularly useful
for the do-once block, since it is officially a loop and can take therefore
loop control statements.

=head2 Loops at the statementlist level vs the statement level

In any sequence of statements, only the value of the final statement is
returned, so all prior statements are evaluated in sink context, which is
automatically eager, to force the evaluation of side effects.  (Side effects
are the only reason to execute such statements in the first place, and Perl
will, in fact, warn you if you do something that is "useless" in sink
context.)  A loop in sink context not only evaluates itself eagerly, but can
optimize away the production of any values from the loop.

The final statement of a statement list is not a sink context, and can
return any value including a lazy list.  However, to support the
expectations of imperative programmers (the vast majority of us, it turns
out), any explicit loop found as the final statement of a statement list is
automatically forced to use sink semantics so that the loop executes to
completion before returning from the block.

This forced sink context is applied to loops I<only> at the statement list
level, that is, at the top level of a compilation unit, or directly inside a
block.  Constructs that parse a single statement or semilist as an argument
are presumed to want the results of that statement, so such constructs
remain lazy even when that statement is a loop.  Assuming each of the
following statements is the final statement in a block, "sunk" loops such as
these may be indicated:

    for LIST { ... }
    ... if COND for LIST
    loop { ... }
    ... while COND
    while COND { ... }
    repeat until COND { ... }

but lazy loops can be indicated by putting the loop in parens or brackets:

    (... if COND for LIST)      # lazy list comprehension
    [for LIST { ... }]
    (loop { ... })

or by use of either a statement prefix or a phaser in statement form:

    lazy for LIST { ... }
    ENTER for LIST { ... }

Note that the corresponding block forms put the loop into a statement list,
so these loops are evaluated in sink context:

    lazy { for LIST { ... } }   # futile use of 'lazy' here
    ENTER { for LIST { ... } }

It doesn't matter that there is only one statement there; what matters is
that a sequence of statements is expected there by the grammar.

An eager loop may likewise be indicated by using the C<eager> statement
prefix:

    eager for LIST { ... }
    eager ... if COND for LIST
    eager loop { ... }
    eager ... while COND
    eager while COND { ... }
    eager repeat until COND { ... }

It is erroneous to write an eager loop without a loop exit, since that will
chew up all your memory.

Note that since C<do> is considered a one-time loop, it is always evaluated
eagerly, despite being a statement prefix.  This is no great hardship; the
C<lazy> prefix is better documentation in any case.  And surely the verb
"do" ought to imply some degree of getting it done eagerly.

The C<given> construct is not considered a loop, and just returns normally.

=head2 Statement-level bare blocks

Although a bare block occurring as a single statement is no longer a do-once
loop, as with loops when used in a statement list, it still executes
immediately as in Perl 5, as if it were immediately dereferenced with a
C<.()> postfix, so within such a block C<CALLER::> refers to the dynamic
scope associated with the lexical scope surrounding the block.

If you wish to return a closure from a function, you must use an explicit
prefix such as C<return> or C<sub> or C<< -> >>.

    sub f1
    {
        # lots of stuff ...
        { say "I'm a closure." }
    }

    my $x1= f1;  # fall-off return is result of the say, not the closure.

    sub f2
    {
        # lots of stuff ...
        return { say "I'm a closure." }
    }

    my $x2= f2;  # returns a Block object.

Use of a placeholder parameter in statement-level blocks triggers a syntax
error, because the parameter is not out front where it can be seen.
However, it's not an error when prefixed by a C<do>, or when followed by a
statement modifier:

    # Syntax error: Statement-level placeholder block
    { say $^x };

    # Not a syntax error, though $x doesn't get the argument it wants
    do { say $^x };

    # Not an error: Equivalent to "for 1..10 -> $x { say $x }"
    { say $^x } for 1..10;

    # Not an error: Equivalent to "if foo() -> $x { say $x }"
    { say $^x } if foo();

It's not an error to pass parameters to such a block either:

    { say $^x + $^x }(5);

But as always, you must use them all:

    # Syntax error: Too many positional parameters passed
    { say $^x + $^x }(5,6);

=head2 The C<gather> statement prefix
X<gather>X<take>

A variant of C<do> is C<gather>.  Like C<do>, it is followed by a statement
or block, and executes it once.  Unlike C<do>, it evaluates the statement or
block in sink (void) context; its return value is instead specified by
calling the C<take> list prefix operator one or more times within the scope
(either lexical or dynamic) of the C<gather>.  The C<take> function's
signature is like that of C<return>; while having the syntax of a list
operator, it merely returns a single item or "argument" (see L<S02> for
definition).

The C<take> function is lexotic if there is a visible outer C<gather>, but
falls back to purely dynamic if not.  Well, it doesn't really fall back,
since a C<take> knows at compile time whether it is being used lexically or
dynamically.  Less obviously, so does a C<gather>; if a C<gather> lexically
contains any C<take> calls, it is marked as lexotic-only, and it will be
invisible to a dynamic C<take>.  If the C<gather> contains no C<take>
lexically, it by definition cannot be the lexotic target of any C<take>, so
it can only harvest dynamic C<take> calls.  The only remaining difficulty
arises if both the user and a library writer attempt to use dynamic gather
with user-defined callbacks that contain C<take>.  So we will say that it is
erroneous for a library writer to mix dynamic gather with callbacks unless
those callbacks are somehow "ungathered" to the outer dynamic scope.
[Conjecture: there should either be an C<callergather> primitive that does
this, or we should allow labeled C<gather>/C<take> for such a situation, and
dynamic C<take> must match the C<gather>'s label (or lack thereof) exactly.
(Using the term "label" loosely, to include other solutions besides the
label syntax, such as .gather and .take methods on some identity object.)]

If you take multiple items in a comma list (since it is, after all, a list
operator), they will be wrapped up in a C<Parcel> object for return as the
next argument.  No additional context is applied by the C<take> operator,
since all context is lazy in Perl 6.  The flattening or slicing of any such
returned parcel will be dependent on how the C<gather>'s return iterator is
iterated (with C<.get> vs C<.getarg>).

The value returned by the C<take> to the C<take>'s own context is that same
returned argument (which is ignored when the C<take> is in sink context).
Regardless of the C<take>'s immediate context, the object returned is also
added to the list of values being gathered, which is returned by the
C<gather> as a lazy list (that is, an iterator, really), with each argument
element of that list corresponding to one C<take>.

Any parcels in the returned list are normally flattened when bound into flat
context.  When bound into a lol context, however, the parcel objects become
real C<List> objects that keep their identity as discrete sublists.  The
eventual binding context thus determines whether to throw away or keep the
groupings resulting from each individual C<take> call.  Most list contexts
are flat rather than sliced, so the boundaries between individual C<take>
calls usually disappear.  (FLAT is an acronym meaning Flat Lists Are
Typical. :)

Because C<gather> evaluates its block or statement in sink context, this
typically causes the C<take> function to be evaluated in sink context.
However, a C<take> function that is not in sink context gathers its return
objects I<en passant> and also returns them unchanged.  This makes it easy
to keep track of what you last "took":

    my @squished = gather for @list {
        state $previous = take $_;
        next if $_ === $previous;
        $previous = take $_;
    }

The C<take> function essentially has two contexts simultaneously, the
context in which the C<gather> is operating, and the context in which the
C<take> is operating.  These need not be identical contexts, since they may
bind or coerce the resulting parcels differently:

    my @y;
    my @x = gather for 1..2 {            # flat context for list of parcels
        my ($y) := \(take $_, $_ * 10);  # binding forces item context
        push @y, $y;
    }
    # @x contains 4 Ints:    1,10,2,20 flattened by list assignment to @x
    # @y contains 2 Parcels: $(1,10),$(2,20) sliced by binding to positional $y

Likewise, we can just remember the gather's result parcel by binding and
later coercing it:

    my ($c) := \(gather for 1..2 {
        take $_, $_ * 10;
    });
    # $c.flat produces 1,10,2,20 -- flatten fully into a list of Ints.
    # $c.lol produces LoL.new($(1,10),$(2,20)) -- list of Parcels, a 2-D list.
    # $c.item produces ($(1,10),$(2,20)).list.item -- a list of Parcels, as an item.

Note that the C<take> itself is in sink context in this example because the
C<for> loop is in the sink context provided inside the gather.

A C<gather> is not considered a loop, but it is easy to combine with a loop
statement as in the examples above.

The C<take> operation may be defined internally using resumable control
exceptions, or dynamic variables, or pigeons carrying clay tablets.  The
choice any particular implementation makes is specifically I<not> part of
the definition of Perl 6, and you should not rely on it in portable code.

=head2 Other C<do>-like forms
X<do>

Other similar forms, where a keyword is followed by code to be controlled by
it, may also take bare statements, including C<try>, C<once>, C<quietly>,
C<start>, C<lazy>, and C<sink>.  These constructs establish a dynamic scope
without necessarily establishing a lexical scope.  (You can always establish
a lexical scope explicitly by using the block form of argument.)  As
statement introducers, all these keywords must be followed by whitespace.
(You can say something like C<try({...})>, but then you are calling the
C<try()> function using function call syntax instead, and since Perl does
not supply such a function, it will be assumed to be a user-defined
function.) For purposes of flow control, none of these forms are considered
loops, but they may easily be applied to a normal loop.

Note that any construct in the statement_prefix category defines special
syntax.  If followed by a block it does not parse as a list operator or even
as a prefix unary; it will never look for any additional expression
following the block.  In particular,

    foo( try {...}, 2, 3 )

calls the C<foo> function with three arguments.  And

    do {...} + 1

add 1 to the result of the do block.  On the other hand, if a
statement_prefix is followed by a non-block statement, all nested blockless
statement_prefixes will terminate at the same statement ending:

    do do do foo(); bar 43;

is parsed as:

    do { do { do { foo(); }}}; bar(43);

=head1 Switch statements
X<given>X<when>X<switch>X<case>X<default>

A switch statement is a means of topicalizing, so the switch keyword is the
English topicalizer, C<given>.  The keyword for individual cases is C<when>:

    given EXPR {
        when EXPR { ... }
        when EXPR { ... }
        default { ... }
    }

The current topic is always aliased to the special variable C<$_>.  The
C<given> block is just one way to set the current topic. A C<for> loop is
another convenient form (assuming one of its loop variables is bound to
C<$_>). However, since every block that doesn't explicitly take a <$_>
parameter or declare C<$_> will get an implicit C<$_>, you can set that
and use the C<when> and C<default> keywords in it:

    sub seek-the-answer() {
        $_ = (^100).pick;
        when 42 { say "The answer!" }
        default { say "A number" }
    }

So switching behavior is actually caused by the C<when> statements in the
block, not by the nature of the block itself.  A C<when> statement implicitly
does a "smart match" between the current topic (C<$_>) and the argument of
the C<when>.  If the smart match succeeds, C<when>'s associated block is
executed, and the innermost surrounding block is automatically broken out of.
(If that is not the block you wish to leave, you must use the C<LABEL.leave>
method (or some other control exception such as C<return> or C<next>) to be
more specific.) The value of the inner block is returned as the value of
the outer block.

If the smart match fails, control proceeds to the next statement normally,
which may or may not be a C<when> statement.  Since C<when> statements are
presumed to be executed in order like normal statements, it's not required
that all the statements in a switch block be C<when> statements (though it
helps the optimizer to have a sequence of contiguous C<when> statements,
because then it can arrange to jump directly to the first appropriate test
that might possibly match.)

The default case:

    default {...}

is exactly equivalent to

    when * {...}

Because C<when> statements are executed in order, the default must come
last.  You don't have to use an explicit default--you can just fall off the
last C<when> into ordinary code.  But use of a C<default> block is good
documentation.

If you use a C<for> loop with a parameter named C<$_> (either explicitly or
implicitly), that parameter can function as the topic of any C<when>
statements within the loop.

You can explicitly break out of a C<when> block (and its surrounding
block) early using the C<succeed> verb.  More precisely, it first scans
outward (lexically) for the innermost containing C<when> block. If that
C<when> block is itself directly inside of a C<when> block, the scan
also skips over that, so you can do nesting such as:

    when * > 2 {
        when 4 { 'four!' }
        default { 'huge' }
    }
    default {
        'little'
    }

The surrounding frame is then left, returning the value provided to C<succeed>.
Breaking out of a block with C<succeed> is also considered a successful return
for the purposes of C<KEEP> and C<UNDO>.

The implicit break of a normal C<when> block works the same way, returning
the value of the entire block (normally from its last statement) via an
implicit C<succeed>.

You can explicitly leave a C<when> block and go to the next statement
following the C<when> by using C<proceed>.  (Note that, unlike C's idea of
"falling through", subsequent C<when> conditions are evaluated.  To jump
into the next C<when> block without testing its condition, you must use a
C<goto>.  But generally that means you should refactor instead.)

If you have a switch that is the main block of a C<for> loop that uses C<$_>
as its loop variable, and you break out of the switch either implicitly or
explicitly (that is, the switch "succeeds"), control merely goes to the end
of that block, and thence on to the next iteration of the loop.  You must
use C<last> (or some more violent control exception such as C<return>) to
break out of the entire loop early.  Of course, an explicit C<next> might be
clearer than a C<succeed> if you really want to go directly to the next
iteration.  On the other hand, C<succeed> can take an optional argument
giving the value for that iteration of the loop.  As with the C<.leave>
method, there is also a C<.succeed> method to break from a labelled block
functioning as a switch:

    OUTER.succeed($retval)

There is a C<when> statement modifier, but it does not have any breakout
semantics; it is merely a smartmatch against the current topic.  That is,

    doit() when 42;

is exactly equivalent to

    doit() if $_ ~~ 42;

This is particularly useful for list comprehensions:

    @lucky = ($_ when /7/ for 1..100);

=head1 Exception handlers
X<CATCH>

Unlike many other languages, Perl 6 specifies exception handlers by placing
a C<CATCH> block I<within> that block that is having its exceptions handled.

The Perl 6 equivalent to Perl 5's C<eval {...}> is C<try {...}>.  (Perl 6's
C<EVAL> function only evaluates strings, not blocks, and does not catch
exceptions.) A C<try> block by default has a C<CATCH> block that handles all
fatal exceptions by ignoring them.  If you define a C<CATCH> block within
the C<try>, it replaces the default C<CATCH>.  It also makes the C<try>
keyword redundant, because any block can function as a C<try> block if you
put a C<CATCH> block within it.  To prevent lazy lists for leaking out
unexpectedly, the inside of a C<try> is always considered an eager context,
unless the C<try> itself is in a sink context, in which case the inside of
C<try> is also in sink context.

Additionally, the C<try> block or statement implicitly enforces a C<use
fatal> context such that failures are immediately thrown as exceptions.
(See below.)

An exception handler is just a switch statement on an implicit topic that
happens to be the current exception to be dealt with.  Inside the C<CATCH>
block, the exception in question is bound to C<$_>.  Because of smart
matching, ordinary C<when> statements are sufficiently powerful to pattern
match the current exception against classes or patterns or numbers without
any special syntax for exception handlers.  If none of the cases in the
C<CATCH> handles the exception, the exception will be rethrown.  To ignore
all unhandled exceptions, use an empty C<default> case.  (In other words,
there is an implicit C<.die> just inside the end of the C<CATCH> block.
Handled exceptions break out past this implicit rethrow.)  Hence, C<CATCH>
is unlike all other switch statements in that it treats code inside a
C<default> block differently from code that's after all the C<when> blocks
but not in a C<default> block.

More specifically, when you write:

    CATCH {
        when Mumble {...}
        default {...}
    }

you're really calling into a I<catch lambda> that works
something like this:

    -> *@! {
        my @handled = ();
        my @unhandled = ();
        my @*undead = ();

        for @! {
            # note, fails current iteration, continues with loop
            SIMPLECATCH { push @*undead, $_; push @unhandled, OUTER::<$_>; }

            .handled = True;
            when Mumble {...}
            default {...}
            .handled = False;

            push @unhandled, $_;

            KEEP { push @handled, $_ if .handled }
        }

        push @unhandled, @*undead;

        # no point in setting their $! if we're gonna blow past
        set_outer_caller's_bang(@handled) unless @unhandled;

        @unhandled;
    }

Whenever an exception occurs during the execution of a handler, it is pushed
onto the end of the C<@*undead> array for later processing by an outer
handler.  If there are any unhandled C<@!> exceptions, or if any exceptions
were caught by the inner SIMPLECATCH (which does nothing but runs its push
code, which should not produce any exceptions), then the CATCH block returns
them to the exception thrower.

The exception thrower looks up the call stack for a catch lambda that
returns () to indicate all exceptions are handled, and then it is happy, and
unwinds the stack to that point.  If any exceptions are returned as not
handled, the exception thrower keeps looking for a higher dynamic scope for
a spot to unwind to.  Note that any C<die> in the catch lambda eventually
rethrows outside the lambda as a new exception, but not until the current
exception handler has a chance to handle all exceptions that came in via
C<@!>.

Resumable exceptions may or may not leave normally depending on the
implementation.  If continuations are used, the C<.resume> call will simply
goto the continuation in question, and the lambda's callframe is abandoned.
Resumable exceptions may also be implemented by simply marking the current
exception as "resumed", in which case the original exception thrower simply
returns to the code that threw the resumable exception, rather than
unwinding before returning.  This could be done by pushing the resumed
exception onto the unhandled list, and then the thrower checking to see if
there is only a single resumed exception in the "unhandled" list.  The
unhandled list is a dynamic variable so that it's easy for .resume to
manipulate it.

A C<CATCH> block sees the lexical scope in which it was defined, but its
caller is the dynamic location that threw the exception.  That is, the stack
is not unwound until some exception handler chooses to unwind it by
"handling" the exception in question.  So logically, if the C<CATCH> block
throws its own exception, you would expect the C<CATCH> block to catch its
own exception recursively forever.  However, a C<CATCH> must not behave that
way, so we say that a C<CATCH> block never attempts to handle any exception
thrown within its own dynamic scope.  (Otherwise any C<die> would cause an
infinite loop.)  Instead we treasure them up and rethrow them to a handler
further up.

Unlike C<try>, the presence of a C<CATCH> block does not imply C<use fatal>
semantics for failures; you may, however, use either an explicit C<try>
block around the C<CATCH> or an explicit C<use fatal> to guarantee that
failures are thrown eagerly rather than lazily.

=head1 Control Exceptions

All abnormal control flow is, in the general case, handled by the exception
mechanism (which is likely to be optimized away in specific cases.)  Here
"abnormal" means any transfer of control outward that is not just falling
off the end of a block.  A C<return>, for example, is considered a form of
abnormal control flow, since it can jump out of multiple levels of closures
to the end of the scope of the current subroutine definition.  Loop commands
like C<next> are abnormal, but looping because you hit the end of the block
is not.  The implicit break (what C<succeed> does explicitly) of a C<when>
block is abnormal.

A C<CATCH> block handles only "bad" exceptions, and lets control exceptions
pass unhindered.  Control exceptions may be caught with a C<CONTROL> block.
Generally you don't need to worry about this unless you're defining a
control construct.  You may have one C<CATCH> block and one C<CONTROL>
block, since some user-defined constructs may wish to supply an implicit
C<CONTROL> block to your closure, but let you define your own C<CATCH>
block.

A C<return> always exits from the lexically surrounding sub or method
definition (that is, from a function officially declared with the C<sub>,
C<method>, or C<submethod> keywords).  Pointy blocks and bare closures are
transparent to C<return>, in that the C<return> statement still means
C<&?ROUTINE.leave> from the C<Routine> that existed in dynamic scope when
the closure was cloned.

It is illegal to return from the closure if that C<Routine> no longer owns a
call frame in the current call stack.

To return a value (to the dynamical caller) from any pointy block or bare
closure, you either just let the block return the value of its final
expression, or you can use C<leave>, which comes in both function and method
forms.  The function (or listop) form always exits from the innermost block,
returning its arguments as the final value of the block exactly as C<return>
does.  The method form will leave any block in the dynamic scope that can be
named as an object and that responds to the C<.leave> method.

Hence, the C<leave> function:

    leave(1,2,3)

is really just short for:

    &?BLOCK.leave(1,2,3)

To return from your immediate caller, you can say:

    caller.leave(1,2,3)

Further call frames up the caller stack may be located by use of the
C<callframe> function:

    callframe({ .labels.any eq 'LINE' }).leave(1,2,3);

By default the innermost call frame matching the selection criteria will be
exited.  This can be a bit cumbersome, so in the particular case of labels,
the label that is already visible in the current lexical scope is considered
a kind of pseudo object specifying a potential dynamic context.  If instead
of the above you say:

    LINE.leave(1,2,3)

it was always exit from your lexically scoped C<LINE> loop, even if some
inner dynamic scope you can't see happens to also have that label.  (In
other words, it's lexotic.)  If the C<LINE> label is visible but you aren't
actually in a dynamic scope controlled by that label, an exception is
thrown.  (If the C<LINE> is not visible, it would have been caught earlier
at compile time since C<LINE> would likely be a bareword.)

In theory, any user-defined control construct can catch any control
exception it likes.  However, there have to be some culturally enforced
standards on which constructs capture which exceptions.  Much like C<return>
may only return from an "official" subroutine or method, a loop exit like
C<next> should be caught by the construct the user expects it to be caught
by.  (Always assuming the user expects the right thing, of course...)  In
particular, if the user labels a loop with a specific label, and calls a
loop control from within the lexical scope of that loop, and if that call
mentions the outer loop's label, then that outer loop is the one that must
be controlled.  In other words, it first tries this form:

    LINE.leave(1,2,3)

If there is no such lexically scoped outer loop in the current subroutine,
then a fallback search is made outward through the dynamic scopes in the
same way Perl 5 does.  (The difference between Perl 5 and Perl 6 in this
respect arises only because Perl 5 didn't have user-defined control
structures, hence the sub's lexical scope was I<always> the innermost
dynamic scope, so the preference to the lexical scope in the current sub was
implicit.  For Perl 6 we have to make this preference for lexotic behavior
explicit.)

Warnings are produced in Perl 6 by throwing a resumable control exception to
the outermost scope, which by default prints the warning and resumes the
exception by extracting a resume continuation from the exception, which must
be supplied by the C<warn()> function (or equivalent).  Exceptions are not
resumable in Perl 6 unless the exception object does the C<Resumable> role.
(Note that fatal exception types can do the C<Resumable> role even if thrown
via C<fail()>--when uncaught they just hit the outermost fatal handler
instead of the outermost warning handler, so some inner scope has to
explicitly treat them as warnings and resume them.)

Since warnings are processed using the standard control exception mechanism,
they may be intercepted and either suppressed or fatalized anywhere within
the dynamic scope by supplying a suitable C<CONTROL> block.  This dynamic
control is orthogonal to any lexically scoped warning controls, which merely
decide whether to call C<warn()> in the first place.

As with calls to C<return>, the warning control exception is an abstraction
that the compiler is free to optimize away (along with the associated
continuation) when the compiler or runtime can determine that the semantics
would be preserved by merely printing out the error and going on.  Since all
exception handlers run in the dynamic scope of the throw, that reduces to
simply returning from the C<warn> function most of the time.  See previous
section for discussion of ways to return from catch lambdas.  The control
lambda is logically separate from the catch lambda, though an implementation
is allowed to combine them if it is careful to retain separate semantics for
catch and control exceptions.

One additional level of control is the notion of I<lazy warnings>.  If,
instead of throwing a warning directly, the program calls C<fail()> with a
resumable exception, the throwing of the warning is delayed until first use
(or the caller's policy) requires it to be thrown.  If the warning exception
supports the C<.resume_value> method, that will be the value of the failure
after it has resumed.  Otherwise the value will be the null string.  Numeric
and string conversions use these lazy warnings to allow (but not require)
failsoft semantics.

=head1 The goto statement
X<goto>

In addition to C<next>, C<last>, and C<redo>, Perl 6 also supports C<goto>.
As with ordinary loop controls, the label is searched for first lexically
within the current subroutine, then dynamically outside of it.  Unlike with
loop controls, however, scanning a scope includes a scan of any lexical
scopes included within the current candidate scope.  As in Perl 5, it is
possible to C<goto> into a lexical scope, but only for lexical scopes that
require no special initialization of parameters.  (Initialization of
ordinary variables does not count--presumably the presence of a label will
prevent code-movement optimizations past the label.)  So, for instance, it's
always possible to C<goto> into the next case of a C<when> or into either
the "then" or "else" branch of a conditional.  You may not go into a
C<given> or a C<for>, though, because that would bypass a formal parameter
binding (not to mention list generation in the case of C<for>).  (Note: the
implicit default binding of an outer C<$_> to an inner C<$_> can be emulated
for a bare block, so that doesn't fall under the prohibition on bypassing
formal binding.)

Because it is possible to go to a label that is after the operation, and
because Perl 6 does one-pass parsing, any C<goto> to a label that has not
been yet declared (or is declared outside the outward lexical scope of the
C<goto>) must enclose the label in quotes.

=head1 Exceptions

As in Perl 5, many built-in functions simply return an undefined value when
you ask for a value out of range, or the function fails somehow.  Perl 6 has
C<Failure> objects, known as "unthrown exceptions" (though really a
C<Failure> merely contains an unthrown exception), which know whether they
have been handled or not.  C<$!> is a convenient link to the last failure,
and only ever contains one exception, the most recent.

[Conjecture: all unhandled exceptions within a routine could be stored in
C<@!>, with the most recent first.  C<$!> would then be sugar for C<@![0]>.
(Or we use push semantics and C<$!> means C<@![*-1]>.) This might be more
robust than merely making C<@!> a parameter to CATCH.  However, the new
semantics of autothrowing when sink eats a Failure means we won't have many
unthrown exceptions waiting around to be handled at the end of the block
anymore.  We should probably at least issue warnings, though, if the GC
eventually collects a failure that was never handled.  We can't really rely
on end-of-routine cleanup to deal with failures that are returned as normal
data, unless we go with the overhead of a lexical C<@!> variable.]

If you test a C<Failure> for C<.defined> or C<.Bool>, the C<Failure> marks
itself as I<handled>; the exception acts as a relatively harmless undefined
value thereafter.  Any other use of the C<Failure> object to extract a
normal value will throw its associated exception immediately.  (The
C<Failure> may, however, be stored in any container whose type allows the
C<Failure> role to be mixed in.) The C<.handled> method returns C<False> on
failures that have not been handled.  It returns C<True> for handled
exceptions and for all non-C<Failure> objects. (That is, it is a C<Mu>
method, not a C<Failure> method.  Only C<Failure> objects need to store the
actual status however; other types just return C<True>.)

The C<.handled> method is C<rw>, so you may mark an exception as handled by
assigning C<True> to it.  Note however that

    $!.handled = 1;

marks only the last exception as handled.  To mark them all as handled you
must access them individually via the implicit loop of a CATCH block.

A bare C<die>/C<fail> takes C<$!> as the default argument specifying the
exception to be thrown or propagated outward to the caller's C<$!>.

You can cause built-ins to automatically throw exceptions on failure using

    use fatal;

The C<fail> function responds to the caller's C<use fatal> state.  It either
returns an unthrown exception, or throws the exception.  Before you get too
happy about this pragma, note that Perl 6 contains various parallel
processing primitives that will tend to get blown up prematurely by thrown
exceptions.  Unthrown exceptions are meant to provide a failsoft mechanism
in which failures can be treated as data and dealt with one by one, without
aborting execution of what may be perfectly valid parallel computations.  If
you I<don't> deal with the failures as data, then sink context will
automatically throw any unhandled C<Failure> that you try to discard.

In any case, the overriding design principle here is that no unhandled
exception is ever dropped on the floor, but propagated outward until it is
handled.  If no explicit handler handles it, the implicit outermost
exception handler will eventually decide to abort and print all unhandled
exceptions passed in as its current C<@!> list.

It is possible to fail with a resumable exception, such as a warning.  If
the failure throws its exception and the exception resumes, the thrower by
default returns the null string (C<''>) to whatever caused the failure to
throw its exception.  This may be overridden by attaching a C<.resume_value>
to the warning.  Hence numeric coercions such as C<+"42foo"> can be forced
to return C<42> after issuing a warning.

=head1 Phasers

A C<CATCH> block is just a trait of the closure containing it, and is
automatically called at the appropriate moment.  These auto-called blocks
are known as I<phasers>, since they generally mark the transition from one
phase of computing to another.  For instance, a C<CHECK> block is called at
the end of compiling a compilation unit.  Other kinds of phasers can be
installed as well; these are automatically called at various times as
appropriate, and some of them respond to various control exceptions and exit
values.  Phasers marked with a C<*> can be used for their return value.

      BEGIN {...}*      at compile time, ASAP, only ever runs once
      CHECK {...}*      at compile time, ALAP, only ever runs once
       LINK {...}*      at link time, ALAP, only ever runs once
       INIT {...}*      at run time, ASAP, only ever runs once
        END {...}       at run time, ALAP, only ever runs once

      ENTER {...}*      at every block entry time, repeats on loop blocks.
      LEAVE {...}       at every block exit time (even stack unwinds from exceptions)
       KEEP {...}       at every successful block exit, part of LEAVE queue
       UNDO {...}       at every unsuccessful block exit, part of LEAVE queue

      FIRST {...}*      at loop initialization time, before any ENTER
       NEXT {...}       at loop continuation time, before any LEAVE
       LAST {...}       at loop termination time, after any LEAVE

        PRE {...}       assert precondition at every block entry, before ENTER
       POST {...}       assert postcondition at every block exit, after LEAVE

      CATCH {...}       catch exceptions, before LEAVE
    CONTROL {...}       catch control exceptions, before LEAVE

    COMPOSE {...}       when a role is composed into a class

Some of the statement prefixes also behave a little bit like phasers, but
they run in-line with the executable code, so they are spelled in lowercase.
They parse the same as phasers:

         do {...}*      run a block or statement as a term
       once {...}*      run only once, suppressing additional evaluations
     gather {...}*      start a co-routine thread
      eager {...}*      evaluate statement eagerly
       lazy {...}*      defer actual evaluation till value is fetched
       sink {...}*      evaluate eagerly but throw results away
        try {...}*      evaluate and trap exceptions (implies 'use fatal')
    quietly {...}*      evaluate and suppress warnings
      start {...}*      start computation of a promised result

Constructs marked with a C<*> have a run-time value, and if evaluated
earlier than their surrounding expression, they simply save their result for
use in the expression later when the rest of the expression is evaluated:

    my $compiletime = BEGIN { now };
    our $temphandle = ENTER { maketemp() };

As with other statement prefixes, these value-producing constructs may be
placed in front of either a block or a statement:

    my $compiletime = BEGIN now;
    our $temphandle = ENTER maketemp();

In fact, most of these phasers will take either a block or a thunk (known as
a I<blast> in the vernacular).  The statement form can be particularly
useful to expose a lexically scoped declaration to the surrounding lexical
scope without "trapping" it inside a block.

Hence these declare the same variables with the same scope as the preceding
example, but run the statements as a whole at the indicated time:

    BEGIN my $compiletime = now;
    ENTER our $temphandle = maketemp();

(Note, however, that the value of a variable calculated at compile time may
not persist under run-time cloning of any surrounding closure.)

Most of the non-value-producing phasers may also be so used:

    END say my $accumulator;

Note, however, that

    END say my $accumulator = 0;

sets the variable to 0 at C<END> time, since that is when the "my"
declaration is actually executed.  Only argumentless phasers may use the
statement form.  This means that C<CATCH> and C<CONTROL> always require a
block, since they take an argument that sets C<$_> to the current topic, so
that the innards are able to behave as a switch statement.  (If bare
statements were allowed, the temporary binding of C<$_> would leak out past
the end of the C<CATCH> or C<CONTROL>, with unpredictable and quite possibly
dire consequences.  Exception handlers are supposed to reduce uncertainty,
not increase it.)

Code that is generated at run time can still fire off C<CHECK> and C<INIT>
phasers, though of course those phasers can't do things that would require
travel back in time.  You need a wormhole for that.

The compiler is free to ignore C<LINK> phasers compiled at run time since
they're too late for the application-wide linking decisions.

Some of these phasers also have corresponding traits that can be set on
variables.  These have the advantage of passing the variable in question
into the closure as its topic:

    our $h will enter { .rememberit() } will undo { .forgetit() };

Only phasers that can occur multiple times within a block are eligible for
this per-variable form.

Apart from C<CATCH> and C<CONTROL>, which can only occur once, most of these
can occur multiple times within the block.  So they aren't really traits,
exactly--they add themselves onto a list stored in the actual trait.  So if
you examine the C<ENTER> trait of a block, you'll find that it's really a
list of phasers rather than a single phaser.

When multiple phasers are scheduled to run at the same moment, the general
tiebreaking principle is that initializing phasers execute in order
declared, while finalizing phasers execute in the opposite order, because
setup and teardown usually want to happen in the opposite order from each
other.  When phasers are in different modules, the C<INIT> and C<END>
phasers are treated as if declared at C<use> time in the using module.  (It
is erroneous to depend on this order if the module is used more than once,
however, since the phasers are only installed the first time they're
noticed.)

The semantics of C<INIT> and C<once> are not equivalent to each other in the
case of cloned closures.  An C<INIT> only runs once for all copies of a
cloned closure.  A C<once> runs separately for each clone, so separate
clones can keep separate state variables:

    our $i = 0;
    ...
    $func = once { state $x { $x = $i++ }; dostuff($i) };

But C<state> automatically applies "once" semantics to any initializer, so
this also works:

    $func = { state $x = $i++; dostuff($i) }

Each subsequent clone gets an initial state that is one higher than the
previous, and each clone maintains its own state of C<$x>, because that's
what C<state> variables do.

Even in the absence of closure cloning, C<INIT> runs before the mainline
code, while C<once> puts off the initialization till the last possible
moment, then runs exactly once, and caches its value for all subsequent
calls (assuming it wasn't called in sink context, in which case the C<once>
is evaluated once only for its side effects).  In particular, this means
that C<once> can make use of any parameters passed in on the first call,
whereas C<INIT> cannot.

All of these phaser blocks can see any previously declared lexical
variables, even if those variables have not been elaborated yet when the
closure is invoked (in which case the variables evaluate to an undefined
value.)

Note: Apocalypse 4 confused the notions of C<PRE>/C<POST> with
C<ENTER>/C<LEAVE>.  These are now separate notions.  C<ENTER> and C<LEAVE>
are used only for their side effects.  C<PRE> and C<POST> return boolean
values which, if false, trigger a runtime exception.  C<KEEP> and C<UNDO>
are just variants of C<LEAVE>, and for execution order are treated as part
of the queue of C<LEAVE> phasers.

It is conjectured that C<PRE> and C<POST> submethods in a class could be
made to run as if they were phasers in any public method of the class.  This
feature is awaiting further exploration by means of a C<ClassHOW> extension.

C<FIRST>, C<NEXT>, and C<LAST> are meaningful only within the lexical scope
of a loop, and may occur only at the top level of such a loop block.  A
C<NEXT> executes only if the end of the loop block is reached normally, or
an explicit C<next> is executed.  In distinction to C<LEAVE> phasers, a
C<NEXT> phaser is not executed if the loop block is exited via any exception
other than the control exception thrown by C<next>.  In particular, a
C<last> bypasses evaluation of C<NEXT> phasers.

[Note: the name C<FIRST> used to be associated with C<state> declarations.
Now it is associated only with loops.  See the C<once> above for C<state>
semantics.]

Except for C<CATCH> and C<CONTROL> phasers, which run while an exception is
looking for a place to handle it, all block-leaving phasers wait until the
call stack is actually unwound to run.  Unwinding happens only after some
exception handler decides to handle the exception that way.  That is, just
because an exception is thrown past a stack frame does not mean we have
officially left the block yet, since the exception might be resumable. In
any case, exception handlers are specified to run within the dynamic scope
of the failing code, whether or not the exception is resumable.  The stack
is unwound and the phasers are called only if an exception is not resumed.

So C<LEAVE> phasers for a given block are necessarily evaluated after any
C<CATCH> and C<CONTROL> phasers.  This includes the C<LEAVE> variants,
C<KEEP> and C<UNDO>.  C<POST> phasers are evaluated after everything else,
to guarantee that even C<LEAVE> phasers can't violate postconditions.
Likewise C<PRE> phasers fire off before any C<ENTER> or C<FIRST> (though not
before C<BEGIN>, C<CHECK>, C<LINK>, or C<INIT>, since those are done at
compile or process initialization time).

The C<POST> block can be defined in one of two ways.  Either the
corresponding C<POST> is defined as a separate phaser, in which case C<PRE>
and C<POST> share no lexical scope.  Alternately, any C<PRE> phaser may
define its corresponding C<POST> as an embedded phaser block that closes
over the lexical scope of the C<PRE>.

If exit phasers are running as a result of a stack unwind initiated by an
exception, this information needs to be made available.  In any case, the
information as to whether the block is being exited successfully or
unsuccessfully needs to be available to decide whether to run C<KEEP> or
C<UNDO> blocks (also see L</"Definition of Success">).  How this information
is made available is implementation dependent.

An exception thrown from an C<ENTER> phaser will abort the C<ENTER> queue,
but one thrown from a C<LEAVE> phaser will not.  The exceptions thrown by
failing C<PRE> and C<POST> phasers cannot be caught by a C<CATCH> in the
same block, which implies that C<POST> phaser are not run if a C<PRE> phaser
fails.

If a C<POST> fails or any kind of C<LEAVE> block throws an exception while
the stack is unwinding, the unwinding continues and collects exceptions to
be handled.  When the unwinding is completed all new exceptions are thrown
from that point.

For phasers such as C<KEEP> and C<POST> that are run when exiting a scope
normally, the return value (if any) from that scope is available as the
current topic within the phaser.  (It is presented as a argument, that is,
either as parcel or an object that can stand alone in a list.  In other
words, it's exactly what C<return> is sending to the outside world in raw
form, so that the phaser doesn't accidentally impose context prematurely.)

The topic of the block outside a phaser is still available as C<<
OUTER::<$_> >>.  Whether the return value is modifiable may be a policy of
the phaser in question.  In particular, the return value should not be
modified within a C<POST> phaser, but a C<LEAVE> phaser could be more
liberal.

Any phaser defined in the lexical scope of a method is a closure that closes
over C<self> as well as normal lexicals.  (Or equivalently, an
implementation may simply turn all such phasers into submethods whose primed
invocant is the current object.)

=head1 Statement parsing

In this statement:

    given EXPR {
        when EXPR { ... }
        when EXPR { ... }
        ...
    }

parentheses aren't necessary around C<EXPR> because the whitespace between
C<EXPR> and the block forces the block to be considered a block rather than
a subscript, provided the block occurs where an infix operator would be
expected.  This works for all control structures, not just the new ones in
Perl 6.  A top-level bare block is always considered a statement block if
there's a term and a space before it:

    if $foo { ... }
    elsif $bar { ... }
    else { ... }
    while $more { ... }
    for 1..10 { ... }

You can still parenthesize the expression argument for old times' sake, as
long as there's a space between the closing paren and the opening brace.
(Otherwise it will be parsed as a hash subscript.)

Note that the parser cannot intuit how many arguments a list operator is
taking, so if you mean 0 arguments, you must parenthesize the argument list
to force the block to appear after a term:

    if caller {...}    # WRONG, parsed as caller({...})
    if caller() {...}  # okay
    if (caller) {...}  # okay

Note that common idioms work as expected though:

    for map { $^a + 1 }, @list { .say }

Unless you are parsing a statement that expects a block argument, it is
illegal to use a bare closure where an operator is expected because it will
be considered to be two terms in row.  (Remove the whitespace if you wish it
to be a postcircumfix.)

Anywhere a term is expected, a block is taken to be a closure definition (an
anonymous subroutine).  If a closure has arguments, it is always taken as a
normal closure.  (In addition to standard formal parameters, placeholder
arguments also count, as do the underscore variables.  Implicit use of C<$_>
with C<.method> also counts as an argument.)

However, if an argumentless closure is empty, or appears to contain nothing
but a comma-separated list starting with a pair or a hash (counting a single
pair or hash as a list of one element), the closure will be immediately
executed as a hash composer, as if called with C<.()>.

    $hash = { };
    $hash = { %stuff };
    $hash = { "a" => 1 };
    $hash = { "a" => 1, $b, $c, %stuff, @nonsense };

    $code = { %_ };                            # use of %_
    $code = { "a" => $_ };                     # use of $_
    $code = { "a" => 1, $b, $c, %stuff, @_ };  # use of @_
    $code = { ; };
    $code = { @stuff };
    $code = { "a", 1 };
    $code = { "a" => 1, $b, $c ==> print };

If you wish to be less ambiguous, the C<hash> list operator will explicitly
evaluate a list and compose a hash of the returned value, while C<sub> or
C<< -> >> introduces an anonymous subroutine:

    $code = -> { "a" => 1 };
    $code = sub { "a" => 1 };
    $hash = hash("a" => 1);
    $hash = hash("a", 1);

Note that the closure in a C<map> will never be interpreted as a hash, since
such a closure always takes arguments, and use of placeholders (including
underscore variables) is taken as evidence of arguments.

If a closure is the right argument of the dot operator, the closure is
interpreted as a hash subscript.

    $code = {$x};       # closure because term expected
    if $term{$x}        # subscript because postfix expected
    if $term {$x}       # expression followed by statement block
    if $term.{$x}       # valid subscript with dot
    if $term\  {$x}     # valid subscript with "unspace"

Similar rules apply to array subscripts:

    $array = [$x];      # array composer because term expected
    if $term[$x]        # subscript because postfix expected
    if $term [$x]       # syntax error (two terms in a row)
    if $term.[$x]       # valid subscript with dot
    if $term\  [$x]     # valid subscript with "unspace"

And to the parentheses delimiting function arguments:

    $scalar = ($x);     # grouping parens because term expected
    if $term($x)        # function call because operator expected
    if $term ($x)       # syntax error (two terms in a row)
    if $term.($x)       # valid function call with explicit dot deref
    if $term\  .($x)    # valid function call with "unspace" and dot

Outside of any kind of expression brackets, a final closing curly on a line
(not counting whitespace or comments) always reverts to the precedence of
semicolon whether or not you put a semicolon after it.  (In the absence of
an explicit semicolon, the current statement may continue on a subsequent
line, but only with valid statement continuators such as C<else> that cannot
be confused with the beginning of a new statement.  Anything else, such as a
statement modifier (on, say, a C<loop> statement) must continue on the same
line, unless the newline be escaped using the "unspace" construct--see S02.)

Final blocks on statement-level constructs always imply semicolon precedence
afterwards regardless of the position of the closing curly.  Statement-level
constructs are distinguished in the grammar by being declared in the
C<statement_control> category:

    macro statement_control:<if> ($expr, &ifblock) {...}
    macro statement_control:<while> ($expr, &whileblock) {...}
    macro statement_control:<BEGIN> (&beginblock) {...}

Statement-level constructs may start only where the parser is expecting the
start of a statement.  To embed a statement in an expression you must use
something like C<do {...}> or C<try {...}>.

    $x =  do { given $foo { when 1 {2}; when 3 {4} } } + $bar;
    $x = try { given $foo { when 1 {2}; when 3 {4} } } + $bar;

The existence of a C<< statement_control:<BEGIN> >> does not preclude us
from also defining a C<< prefix:<BEGIN> >> that I<can> be used within an
expression:

    macro prefix:<BEGIN> (&beginblock) { beginblock().repr }

Then you can say things like:

    $recompile_by = BEGIN { time } + $expiration_time;

But C<< statement_control:<BEGIN> >> hides C<< prefix:<BEGIN> >> at the
start of a statement.  You could also conceivably define a C<< prefix:<if>
>>, but then you may not get what you want when you say:

    die if $foo;

since C<< prefix:<if> >> would hide C<< statement_modifier:<if> >>.

Built-in statement-level keywords require whitespace between the keyword and
the first argument, as well as before any terminating loop.  In particular,
a syntax error will be reported for C-isms such as these:

    if(...) {...}
    while(...) {...}
    for(...) {...}

=head1 Definition of Success

Hypothetical variables are somewhat transactional--they keep their new
values only on successful exit of the current block, and otherwise are
rolled back to their original values.

It is, of course, a failure to leave the block by propagating an error
exception, though returning a defined value after catching an exception is
okay.

In the absence of error exception propagation, a successful exit is one that
returns a defined value or parcel.  (A defined parcel may contain undefined
values.) So any Perl 6 function can say

    fail "message";

and not care about whether the function is being called in item or list
context.  To return an explicit scalar undef, you can always say

    return Mu;          # like "return undef" in Perl 5

Then in list context, you're returning a list of length 1, which is defined
(much like in Perl 5).  But generally you should be using C<fail> in such a
case to return an exception object.  In any case, returning an unthrown
exception is considered failure from the standpoint of C<let>.  Backtracking
over a closure in a regex is also considered failure of the closure, which
is how hypothetical variables are managed by regexes.  (And on the flip
side, use of C<fail> within a regex closure initiates backtracking of the
regex.)

=head1 When is a closure not a closure

Everything is conceptually a closure in Perl 6, but the optimizer is free to
turn unreferenced closures into mere blocks of code.  It is also free to
turn referenced closures into mere anonymous subroutines if the block does
not refer to any external lexicals that should themselves be cloned.  (When
we say "clone", we mean the way the system takes a snapshot of the routine's
lexical scope and binds it to the current instance of the routine so that if
you ever use the current reference to the routine, it gets the current
snapshot of its world in terms of the lexical symbols that are visible to
it.)

All remaining blocks are conceptually cloned into closures as soon as the
lexical scope containing them is entered.  (This may be done lazily as long
as consistent semantics are preserved, so a block that is never executed and
never has a reference taken can avoid cloning altogether.  Execution or
reference taking forces cloning in this case--references are not allowed to
be lazily cloned, since no guarantee can be made that the scope needed for
cloning will remain in existence over the life of the reference.)

In particular, package subroutines are a special problem when embedded in a
changing lexical scope (when they make reference to it).  The binding of
such a definition to a name within a symbol table counts as taking a
reference, so at compile time there is an initial binding to the symbol
table entry in question.  For "global" bindings to symbol tables visible at
compile time, this binds to the compile-time view of the lexical scopes.
(At run-time, the initial run-time view of these scopes is copied from the
compiler's view of them, so that initializations carry over, for instance.)
At run time, when such a subroutine is cloned, an additional binding is done
at clone time to the same symbol table entry that the original was bound to.
(The binding is not restored on exit from the current lexical scope; this
binding records the I<last> cloning, not the currently in-use cloning, so
any use of the global reference must take into consideration that it is
functioning only as a cache of the most recent cloning, not as a surrogate
for the current lexical scope.)

Matters are more complicated if the package in question is lexically
defined.  In such cases, the package must be cloned as if it were a sub on
entry to the corresponding lexical scope.  All runtime instances of a single
package declaration share the same set of compile-time declared functions,
however, the runtime instances can have different lexical environments as
described in the preceding paragraph.  If multiple conflicting definitions
of a sub exist for the same compile-time package, an error condition exists
and behavior is not specified for Perl 6.0.

Methods in classes behave functionally like package subroutines, and have
the same binding behavior if the classes are cloned.  Note that a class
declaration, even an augment, is fundamentally a compile-time operation;
composition only happens once and the results are recorded in the prototype
class.  Runtime typological manipulations are limited to reseating
C<OUTER::> scopes of methods.

Lexical names do not share this problem, since the symbol goes out of scope
synchronously with its usage.  Unlike global subs, they do not need a
compile-time binding, but like global subs, they perform a binding to the
lexical symbol at clone time (again, conceptually at the entry to the outer
lexical scope, but possibly deferred.)

    sub foo {
        # conceptual cloning happens to both blocks below
        my $x = 1;
        my sub bar { print $x }         # already conceptually cloned, but can be lazily deferred
        my &baz := { bar(); print $x }; # block is cloned immediately, forcing cloning of bar
        my $code = &bar;                # this would also force bar to be cloned
        return &baz;
    }

In particular, blocks of inline control flow need not be cloned until
called.  [Note: this is currently a potential problem for user-defined
constructs, since you have to take references to blocks to pass them to
whatever is managing the control flow.  Perhaps the laziness can be deferred
through C<Capture>s to binding time, so a slurpy of block refs doesn't clone
them all prematurely.  On the other hand, this either means the C<Capture>
must be smart enough to keep track of the lexical scope it came from so that
it can pass the info to the cloner, or it means that we need some special
fat not-cloned-yet references that can carry the info lazily.  Neither
approach is pretty.]

Some closures produce C<Block> objects at compile time that cannot be
cloned, because they're not attached to any runtime code that can actually
clone them.  C<BEGIN>, C<CHECK>, C<LINK>, C<INIT>, and C<END> blocks fall
into this category.  Therefore you can't reliably refer to run-time
variables from these closures even if they appear to be in the scope.  (The
compile-time closure may, in fact, see some kind of permanent copy of the
variable for some storage classes, but the variable is likely to be
undefined when the closure is run in any case.)  It's only safe to refer to
package variables and file-scoped lexicals from such a routine.

On the other hand, it is required that C<CATCH> and C<LEAVE> blocks be able
to see transient variables in their current lexical scope, so their cloning
status depends at least on the cloning status of the block they're in.

=head1 AUTHORS

    Larry Wall <larry@wall.org>

=for vim:set expandtab sw=4:
