=encoding utf8

=head1 TITLE

Synopsis 22: Distributions, Recommendations, Delivery and Installation

=head1 VERSION

    Created: 15 March 2014

    Last Modified: 27 September 2015
    Version: 6

=head1 TERMINOLOGY

Because many of the concepts used in this document may be overloaded by
other concepts in the mind of the reader, it seems like a good idea to define
some terminology first.  Please note that these definitions only apply within
the context of Perl 6.

=head2 compilation unit

A piece of code that can be compiled as a unit.  It can either exist in a
file (and be compiled using C<use> or C<require>), or be presented as a stream
of characters for compilation with C<EVAL>.  An example of a compilation unit
in a file:

  lib/JSON/Fast.pm6

=head2 distribution

A distribution is an archive of some form that can be used to install zero
or more compilation units (each stored in a separate file), with any possibly
associated files needed for execution.  For example:

  lib/JSON/Fast.pm6
  lib/JSON/PurePerl.pm6

It has a name for identification, which may or may not coincide with the
compilation units in the distribution.  An example of a distribution name:

  JSON-Fast

It also has a version, to distinguish it from other distributions with the
same name.  For instance:

  1.23

Which, together, are used to create the filename of the distribution, for
instance:

  JSON-Fast.1.23.tar.gz

Please note that by changing the C<::> from the module specification to a
C<-> for the filename of the archive, we are effectively disallowing an owner
to upload a distribution for "JSON-Fast" and "JSON::Fast" at the same time.
This seems unlikely to become a problem.

A Perl 6 distribution B<must> contain a configuration file named C<META6.json>,
containing JSON-encoded information about the contents of the distribution.

=head2 owner

The owner of a distribution is responsible for the development of a
distribution.  This can either be a single person, or a (semi-)official
organisation.  The owner of a distribution has a (mnemonic) name, e.g.:

  JRANDOM

Please note that the owner is not necessarily the developer of a distribution,
although if the owner is a single individual, this is pretty likely.

=head2 content storage

A service to which an owner can upload a distribution to and other people can
download B<specific> distributions from.  This is most likely some online
web-service, but it does not need to be.  It has a logical name that is
essentially a URL.  An example would be:

  cpan

The (mnemonic) name of the owner usually coincides with the userid or login
name used to upload distributions, but does not need to be.

=head2 auth

The C<auth> of a distribution, is the combination of the content storage name
with the name of the owner, separated by a colon.  For example:

  cpan:JRANDOM

Please note that this is B<not> an authority, merely an indication of the
location where the distribution for that owner was obtained.  Typically the
auth of a distribution is used to try to load compilation units of already
installed distributions, such as in:

  use JSON::Fast:auth<cpan:JRANDOM>;

=head2 identity

The identity of a distribution, is the combination of name of the content
storage, the name of the owner, name and version of a distribution, separated
by colons.  For example:

  cpan:JRANDOM:JSON-Fast:1.23

There should really be only one unique distribution for a given identity in the
world.

The content storage should accept an identity and either directly return the
archive for that distribution, or return a URL from which that distribution
can be downloaded.

=head2 recommendation manager

A service that will translate a request for a compilation unit (with optional
owner and/or version and/or content storage specification, like a C<use>
statement) into a list of zero or more identities of distributions that match
the request.

The recommendation manager is only used during the installation process of
the distribution for a wanted compilation unit.

A recommendation manager can be run by a community (like the current Perl 6
ecosystem or the packages list for Perl 5 on CPAN), or by company (for use
inside the company itself), or by any reviewing / grading service (for use
by anybody wanting to use that service), or by any other person willing to
put in the effort.

A request for:

  JSON::PurePerl

would yield the identity:

  cpan:JRANDOM:JSON-Fast:1.23

because the compilation unit C<JSON::PurePerl> is part of the C<JSON::Fast>
distribution.

However, a request for:

  JSON::Fast:auth<github:JRANDOM>

would not find anything, because it has the wrong content storage specification
("github" instead of "cpan").

Please note that a recommendation manager does not need to be bound to a single
content storage.  In fact, a recommendation manager would be best if being able
to supply identities from the best of B<all> worlds.  And potentially be
able to recommend identities responding to more natural language queries, but
that is probably outside the scope of this specification.

A bundle of distributions is basically just a collection of identities that
listen to a name (such as C<Rakudo *>).  A recommendation manager may provide
bundles as part of its service.  And packagers may use this information as the
source for bundling distributions in their specific packaging system.

=head1 DISTRIBUTION

A Perl 6 distribution consists of an archive of some form (presumably a
.tar.gz, .tar.bz2 or .zip file) which is expected to at least contain a file
called "META6.json".  The existence of this file indicates that this
distribution is a Perl 6 distribution.  This is important for those archive
networks that also serve as a content-distribution system for other types
of distributions (such as PAUSE / CPAN), so that they can adapt the processing
of the contents, or decide to ignore any processing at all (such as CPAN-testers
not being able to test Perl 6 distributions (yet)).

=head2 META6.json

The META6.json file is a JSON-file that must at least contain a C<perl>,
C<name>, C<version> and C<description> section.

=head3 meta6

Optional.  The version of the META6.json schema in use, as a quoted Version
literal (without the "v" prefix).  If omitted a default value of "0" is assumed,
which means the file conforms to S22 version 6 (i.e. pre-v6.c format).

=head3 perl

Mandatory.  The minimal perl version for which this distribution can be
installed.  Specified as a version string.  So:

  "perl" : "6.d"

would not allow installation on Perl version 6.c

=head3 name

Mandatory.  The name identifying this distribution.  This is usually the name
of the main module that this distribution provides.  An example of this would
be:

  "name" : "JSON::Fast"

=head3 version

Mandatory.  The version literal for this distribution.  An example of this
would be:

  "version" : "1.23"

=head3 description

Mandatory.  A one line description of this distribution.  So, for instance:

  "description" : "Providing fast JSON encoding/decoding"

=head3 authors

Optional.  A list of (mnemonic) names of people who work / have worked on this
distribution.  For informational purposes only.  An example:

  "authors" : [
    "Janet Random",
    "Sam Helpedwithit"
  ]

Please note that for identification purposes, only the owner (who uploaded
the distribution to the content storage) should be used.

=head3 provides

Mandatory.  A list of module - local filename pairs that this distribution makes
available to be C<use>d.  For example:

  "provides" : {
    "JSON::Fast"     : "lib/JSON/Fast.pm6",
    "JSON::PurePerl" : "lib/JSON/PurePerl.pm6"
  }

Please note that the filenames specified only indicate the names of the files
in the B<distribution>.  The installer may need to mangle filenames to be able
support file systems that do not support the file names given (e.g. when they
contain Unicode characters where the file system does not support them).  This
also implies that any installer needs to keep a local database that is able to
convert from the module names given, to the actual associated file).

=head3 depends

Optional.  A list of run-time dependencies, specified as C<use> strings.  To
indicate alternatives, it is possible to specify a list of C<use> strings,
instead of just a single use string.  So:

  "depends" : [
    "Sereal:auth<cpan:*>:ver(1..*)",
    [ "Archive::Compress", "Archive::Zlib" ]
  ]

would indicate a dependency on Sereal, and either Archive::Compress or
Archive::Zlib.

An installer has the option to automatically install any dependencies, if the
user has so indicated.  Dependencies and alternatives should be tried in the
order they are specified.  In the case of alternatives, the first one
for which the recommendation manager returns an identity should be installed.
Failure of installation of an alternative may allow automatic attempts on other
alternatives.

Please note that the C<use> strings of compilation units are specified.  It
is the responsibility of the recommendation manager to turn these into
identities of distributions that can be downloaded.

=head3 emulates

Optional.  A hash in which the key is the compunit (provided by the
distribution) to be aliased, and the value is the use string that should match
to get that compilation unit.  An example of this would be:

  "emulates" : {
    "JSON::Fast" : "JSON::XS:auth<cpan:MLEHMANN>"
  }

If then later, a program would say:

  use JSON::XS;

it would in fact load the C<JSON::Fast> compunit, but make it appear as a
C<JSON::XS> compunit, but only if there was no "real" C<JSON::XS> compunit
installed that would match the C<use> specification.  In other words: if the
real thing is available, then it will be used.  If it is not, it will fall back
to the indicated compilation unit.  And it will look like you are using the
thing you asked for.

Conversely, if one would do a:

  use JSON::Fast;

then later doing a:

  use JSON::XS:auth<cpan:MLEHMANN>;

in the same scope would become a no-op, just as if the compunit had already
been loaded.

Please note that it is responsibility of the emulating compunit to actually
provide a compatible interface with emulated compunit.

=head3 supersedes

Optional.  Has the same meaning as "emulates" for the L</CompUnitRepo>.
But has additional meaning for external packagers: it indicates a potential
superseding of the indicated compilation unit from the packagers point of
view.  See L</superseded-by>.

=head3 superseded-by

Optional.  Has the reverse meaning of "emulates" for the L</CompUnitRepo>.
It is a hash in which the key is compunit provided by the distribution, and
the value is the C<use> string of the compunit it should be aliased to if
that compunit is available.  So in this case:

  "superseded-by" : {
    "JSON::Fast" : "SuperJSON:ver(v1.0 .. *)"
  }

it would mean that if a program attempts to load the C<JSON::Fast> compunit
of this distribution, it should instead use any C<SuperJSON> compunit that is
installed that has a version of 1.0 or higher.  In other words: please don't
use my compunit, unless you really have to.

This tag has additional meaning for packagers: if a packager detects a valid
C<supersedes> and C<superseded-by> pair in its collection of distributions to
be packaged, the packager may decide to only supply the distribution providing
the C<superseded-by> compilation unit.

Please note that C<superseded-by> has no meaning as a C<depends>, so an
installer should probably not automatically install any C<superseded-by>
compunits.

=head3 excludes

Optional.  A hash in which the key is a compilation unit provided by this
distribution, and the value is a C<use> string of all compilation units that
will be disallowed when attempted to be loaded in the same lexical scope.
An example of this would be:

  "excludes" : {
    "JSON::PurePerl" : "JSON::Slow:auth<cpan:*>:ver(1..*)"
  }

So, if a lexical scope loads C<JSON::PurePerl> from this distribution, then
attempting to load C<JSON::Slow> will cause a Failure.  Please note that this
has B<no> meaning for packagers: it is simply a way to provide a better error
message if a collision of some sort will occur when both modules are loaded
in the same lexical scope.

=head3 build-depends

Optional.  A list of build-time dependencies, specified as C<use> strings.  An
example of this would be:

  "build-depends" : [
    "Archive::Zip"
  ]

=head3 test-depends

Optional.  A list of test-time dependencies, specified as C<use> strings.  An
example of this would be:

  "test-depends" : [
    "Test:auth<cpan:OVID>"
  ]

=head3 resources

Optional.  A list of file names, each of them corresponding to a file
in the "resources" directory in the distribution.  At build time any
not-yet existing files should be created.  The installer will install
all files into a location at its discretion (taking care of file-system
case-insensitivity and Unicode-support issues), and make the files
available through the L</%?RESOURCES> hash.

=head3 support

Optional.  A hash of key-value pairs regarding support for this distribution.
Possible names are: C<email>, C<mailinglist>, C<bugtracker>, C<source>,
C<irc>, C<phone>.

=over 4

=item email

The email address of the owner of this distribution, if any.

=item mailinglist

The mailinglist of users of this distribution, if any.

=item bugtracker

The bugtracker of this distribution, if any.

=item source

The URL of the source of this distribution, if any.

=item irc

The URL of the IRC channel where this distribution can be discussed, if any.

=item phone

A fully qualified phone number (with potential cost indication) that can be
used with queries about this distribution.

=back

=head3 production

Optional.  A Boolean to indicate whether or not this is a distribution intended
to be used in production.  For instance:

  "production" : true

By default, a distribution is not ready for production.  If a distribution
is not ready for production, then it will never be recommended.

Please note that this section is only to be used by B<installers>, giving them
the opportunity to decide whether or not to install that distribution.  Once
a distribution is installed, it can be loaded just like any other distribution.

=head3 license

Recommended, even if the license status is unknown, or there is none
(see below).
The L<SPDX|https://spdx.org/licenses> license identifier that the
package is distributed under.

I<"By providing a short identifier, users can efficiently refer to a license without
having to redundantly reproduce the full license".> ― spdx.org

SPDX license identifiers are meant to be interoperable and are the most widely
used standardized identifiers for licenses.

  "license" : "Artistic-2.0"

If the license isn't on the SPDX standardized list, it is highly recommended to
include a URL to the text of the license under the support key in addition to
the name of the license:

  "license" : "Artistic-2.0",
  "support": {
    "license": "http://www.perlfoundation.org/artistic_license_2_0"
  },

In the case that it is known that the author has choosen no license, C<NONE>
should be used:

  "license" : "NONE"

In the event that a distributor or some other person does not know the license,
and therefore makes no assertion about whether the project is or is not licensed,
C<NOASSERTION> should be used:

  "license" : "NOASSERTION”"

=head3 tags

Optional.  A list of general purpose tags.  For instance:

  "tags" : [
    "json",
    "perl6"
  ]

It has no meaning other than the meaning B<you> assign to it.

=head2 Special directories

A distribution may contain several directories that will be handled
specially.

=head3 bin

Any file inside this directory, will be installed as a callable shell
application.

=head3 t

All C<.t> files in this directory, will be tested in alphabetical order,
possibly in parallel.

=head3 hooks

All files in this directory should contain executable Perl 6 code, to be
executed at various stages of the install process of this distribution.

=head2 Installation

Distributions can be installed with an installer.  This may be a command-line
script, or be some kind of GUI.  The installer needs the user to (implicitly)
select the C<CompUnitRepo> in which the distribution should be installed, and
the recommendation manager that should be used to convert requests for a
compilation unit into an identity of a distribution to be downloaded.

=head1 CLASSES

=head2 CompUnitRepo

Base class (interface, really) for the object living in the L</@?INC> array.
Used both for installing compunits, as well as finding a certain compunit by
way of its from, longname, auth and ver information.

=head3 Specifying a CompUnitRepo

The specification of a CompUnitRepo can happen at various places: in a
configuration file, on the command-line when starting (with C<-I>), and in
code when trying to create a CompUnitRepo object programmatically.

Each specification consists of a CompUnitRepo class specification (either
explicitly, implicitly, or the short-hand form using the L</short-id>
identifier), optional named parameters and a location indicator (usually a
path or a URL).

Some examples (where CURL is short for CompUnitRepo::Local):

  /foo/bar                    simple CURL::File in /foo/bar
  file#/foo/bar               (same)
  inst#/installed             simple CURL::Installation in /installed
  inst#name<work>#/installed  (same) but also set %?CUSTOM_LIB<work>
  inst#name[work]#/installed  (same) but more CLI-friendly
  inst#name{work}#/installed  (same) alternate CLI-friendly way
  CompUnitRepo::Local::Installation#/installed  (same) but with full class name
  CompUnitRepo::GitHub#masak/html-template      get it from GitHub

Multiple specifications may be concatenated with C<,>.  If no class is
specified on subsequent specifications, then the previous class specification
will be assumed.  So:

  /foo/bar,/foo/baz           both use CURL::File
  inst#/installed,/also       both use CURL::Installation
  /foo/bar,inst#/installed    first CURL::File, second CURL::Installation

=head3 new

  my $repo = CompUnitRepo.new( $specification );

Create a new CompUnitRepo-like object with the given specification, either
for inclusion in L</@?INC>, or to install a distribution.  Returns the
instantiated object.

Please note that for a given C<specification>, there should always only be
one C<CompUnitRepo> object in a process.

=head3 short-id

  say CompUnitRepo::Local::File.short-id;   # "file"

Returns a short C<\w+> identifier string (a C<tag> if you will) to identify
the use of this repo, e.g. in strings provided with the C<-I> command line
parameter.  It should be unique for all of the CompUnitRepo subclasses loaded.
The following C<short-id>'s are pre-defined:

  file   CompUnitRepo::Local::File
  inst   CompUnitRepo::Local::Installation

=head3 install

  my $installed = $repo.install( $dist );

Install the compilation units of a L</Distribution> in the appropriate way
for this CompUnitRepo-like object.  May cause a fatal exception if this
repository does not support installing.  The parameter contains the
L</Distribution> object to be installed.  Returns True if the distribution
was installed, or a C<Failure> if it didn't.

Of course, any implementation of L<CompUnitRepo>'s C<install> interface, may
decide to accept additional meta-information and store this and make available
for later introspection.

=head3 uninstall

  my $removed = $repo.uninstall( $dist );

The opposite of L</install>.

=head3 candidates

  my @candidates = $repo.candidates( $longname, $auth?, $ver?, $from? );

Return L<CompUnit> candidates given the matching credentials.

=head2 CompUnitRepo::Local::File

The simplest, default case for locating compilation units on a file system.
The module name specified should directly map to a file, similar to how
Perl 5 this does.  Mainly intended to be used in development situations
to allow developers to have modules to be available without them having to be
installed.

=head3 install

Will fail unconditionally: installing compilation units is done by putting
files in the right location.

=head2 CompUnitRepo::Local::Installation

The default case for installed compilation units.  Similar to the way Perl 5
installs modules, but with meta-information per object, rather than globally
in a C<packlist>.  This should be used by installers such as C<panda>.

=head3 install

  my $installed = $repo.install( $dist );

Install the given L</Distribution> object in this repo.

=head2 Distribution

The class for installing distributions using
L</CompUnitRepo::Local::Installation>.  Basically provides the API to access
the C<META6.json> file of a distribution.  It should at least contain the
following methods:

=head3 meta

  my $meta = $dist.meta;

Return a Hash with the representation of the meta-data, constructed the same
way as in the C<META6.json> specification.  Please note that an actual
META6.json file does not need to exist, just a representation in that format.

=head3 content

  my $content = $dist.content( <provides JSON::Fast lib/JSON/Fast.pm6> );

  my $content = $dist.content( <resource images fido.png> );

Return the octet-stream as specified by the given keys, navigating through
the C<META6.json> hash.

=head2 Distribution::Local::Tar

An implementation of the C<Distribution> API for locally stored C<.tar> files.

=head2 CompUnit

The object that describes a compilation unit.  Contains as much meta-data
as possible, e.g. from the C<Distribution> object it came from.

=head3 new

  my $compunit = CompUnit.new( $path );

Create a new CompUnit object with the given specification.  Returns the
instantiated object, or C<Failure> if it could not find the C<path>.

Please note that for a given C<path>, there should always only be one
C<CompUnit> object in a process.  This to prevent reloading the same
compilation unit more than once.

=head3 load

  my $loaded = @candidates[0].load(...);

Returns True if loading of the C<CompUnit> was successful, or a C<Failure>
if something went wrong.

=head3 loaded

  my $loaded = $compunit.loaded;

Return whether the compunit has been loaded.

=head3 precomp

  my $precompiled = $compunit.precomp;

Create a pre-compiled version of the CompUnit.  Optionally takes an output
file argument (default: the same path as the source, with an extension
identifying it is a precompiled version), an optional named argument C<:INC>
(with default C<@?INC>) and an optional named argument C<:force> to force
creation even if the output file already exists.

=head1 SYSTEM VARIABLES

Several dynamic variables are available.

=head2 %?RESOURCE

This hash provides compile and runtime access to files associated with the
L</Distribution> of the current compilation unit.

So, if the C<META6.json> file contains this C<resource> section:

  "resource" : {
    "images" : [
      "fido.png", "zowie.png"
    ],
    "libraries" : {
      "inline_helper" : "build-time",
    }
  }

then the C<Distribution> is supposed to contain the files
C<resource/images/fido.png> and C<resource/images/zowie.png>.  After
installation, IO objects of such a file would be available through

  %?RESOURCE<images><fido.png>

The absolute path could be obtained with:

  %?RESOURCE<images><fido.png>.abspath

and a handle could be obtained with:

  %?RESOURCE<images><fido.png>.open

without there being any guarantee that this path has anything to do with the
path as specified in the distribution.  Please also note that the installer
will probably mangle filenames of actually installed files.

This means you can have files with Unicode characters in upper/lower case,
and still be able to access them when installed on a file system that does
not support Unicode.

If a leaf of the "resource" hash is a hash, it indicates files with special
properties (such as being provided by the builder, so not part of the
distribution).  This will allow a good MANIFEST to be created from the
META6.json information.

=head2 %?CUSTOM_LIB

This hash provides key/value pairs of C<CompUnitRepo> specifications, to be
used by packagers and/or installers.

=head2 @?INC

This array contains the C<CompUnitRepo> objects that will be queried in turn
whenever an attempt should be made to load a compilation unit (be that at
compile time with C<use>, or at runtime with C<require>.

The first C<CompUnitRepo> object to return one candidate, will then be loaded
and no further C<CompUnitRepo> objects in C<@?INC> will be queried.  If the
first C<CompUnitRepo> object to return C<any> candidates, returns more
than one candidate, then B<all> other C<CompUnitRepo> objects in C<@?INC> will
also be queried, to allow any error message to present a B<full> list of
C<CompUnit> candidate objects.

=head1 AUTHORS

    Elizabeth Mattijsen <liz@dijkmat.nl>

=for vim:set expandtab sw=4:
