=encoding utf8

=head1 TITLE

Synopsis 29: Builtin Functions

=head1 VERSION

    Created: 12 Mar 2005

    Last Modified: 24 April 2015
    Version: 63

The document is a draft.

=head1 Notes

In Perl 6, all builtin functions belong to a named package (generally a
class or role). Not all
functions are guaranteed to be imported into the CORE scope.
In addition, the list of functions imported into C<CORE> will be
subject to change with each release of Perl. Authors wishing to
"Future Proof" their code should either specifically import the
functions they will be using, or always refer to the functions by their
full name.

After 6.0.0 comes out, global aliases will not be removed lightly,
and will never be removed at all without having gone through a
deprecation cycle of at least a year.  In any event, you can specify
that you want the interface for a particular version of Perl, and
that can be emulated by later versions of Perl to the extent that
security updates allow.

Where code is given here, it is intended to define semantics, not to
dictate implementation.

=head2 Operators vs. Functions

There is no particular difference between an operator and a function,
but for the sake of documentation, only functions declared without
specifying a grammatical category or with a category of C<term:>
(see L<S02/"Bits and Pieces">) will be described as "functions",
and everything else as "operators" which are outside of the scope
of this document.  (See S03 for operators.)

=head2 Multis vs. Functions

In actual fact, most of the "functions" defined here are multi
subs, or are multi methods that are also exported as multi subs.
The Setting is responsible for importing all the standard multi subs
from their various packages into the CORE lexical scope.  See S02.

=head1 Type Declarations

The following type declarations are assumed:

=over

=item Matcher

 subset Matcher of Mu where * !=== any(Bool,Match,Nil)

Used to supply a test to match against. Assume C<~~> will be used against it.
Booleans are forbidden because they almost always indicate a programming
error where the argument has been evaluated too soon against the wrong C<$_>.
For instance:

    grep $_ == 1, 1,2,3;        # evaluating wrong $_, so forbidden
    grep { $_ == 1 }, 1,2,3;    # okay
    grep * == 1, 1,2,3;         # okay


=item Ordering

 subset KeyExtractor of Code where { .signature === :(Any --> Any) };
 subset Comparator   of Code where { .signature === :(Any, Any --> Int ) };
 subset OrderingPair of Pair where { .left ~~ KeyExtractor && .right ~~ Comparator };

 subset Ordering where Signature | KeyExtractor | Comparator | OrderingPair | Whatever;

Used to handle comparisons between things.  Generally this
ends up in functions like C<sort()>,
C<min()>, C<max()>, etc., as a $by parameter which provides
the information on how two things compare relative to each other.

=over

=item Comparator

A closure with arity of 2, which for ordering returns
negative/zero/positive, signaling the first argument should
be before/tied with/after the second. aka "The Perl 5 way".

For equivalence the closure returns either not 0 or 0 indicating
if the first argument is equivalent or not to the second.

=item KeyExtractor

A closure with arity of 1, which returns the "key" by which
to compare.  Values are compared using C<cmp> for orderings
and C<eqv> for equivalences, which in Perl 6 do different
comparisons depending on the types.  (To get a Perl 5 string
ordering you must compare with C<leg> instead.)

Internally the result of the KeyExtractor on a value should
be cached.

Note that it is very easy to generate a simple C<KeyExtractor>
using C<~*> for strings and C<+*> for numbers, since with most
simple operators C<*> returns a closure of one argument.

    @sorted = sort +*, @unsorted;  #ascending numeric
    @sorted = sort -*, @unsorted;  #descending numeric

=item OrderingPair

A combination of the two methods above, for when one wishes
to take advantage of the internal caching of keys that is
expected to happen, but wishes to compare them with something
other than C<eqv> or C<cmp>, such as C<E<lt>=E<gt>> or C<leg>.

=item Signature

If a signature is specified as a criterion, the signature is
bound to each value and then each parameter does comparisons
in positional order according to its type, as modified by
its traits.  Basically, the system will write the body of
the key extraction and comparison subroutine for you based on
the signature.

For ordering the list of positional parameter comparisons is
reduced as if using [||] but all comparisons do not need to be
performed if an early one determines an increasing or decreasing
order.  For equivalence the list is reduced as if using [&&].

=item Whatever

An ordering of C<*> does the default comparison for the operator:

    @sorted = sort *, @unsorted;

=back

=back

=head1 Function Packages

=head2 Context

=over

=item caller

See L<S06/"The C<callframe> and C<caller> functions">.

=item callframe

See L<S06/"The C<callframe> and C<caller> functions">.

=item EVAL

 macro EVAL ( Str|Buf $code, Grammar :$lang = CALLER::<$?PARSER>)

Execute C<$code> as if it were code written in C<$lang>. If C<$code>
is of type C<Buf>, the same decoding techniques are applied as a compiler
for C<$lang> would usually do to input files.

The default for C<$lang> is the language in effect at the exact
location of the C<EVAL> call.

Returns whatever C<$code> returns, or fails when the compilation fails.

Note that unlike in Perl 5's C<eval>, C<EVAL> does not catch any exceptions or control
exceptions.

=item EVALFILE

 multi EVALFILE (Str $filename ; Grammar :$lang = Perl6)

Behaves like, and replaces Perl 5 C<do EXPR>, with optional C<$lang>
support.

=item exit

 multi exit (Int $status = 0)

Stops all program execution, and returns C<$status> to the calling environment.

An exit runs all appropriate scope-leaving blocks such as C<LEAVE>, C<KEEP>,
and C<UNDO>, followed by all C<END> blocks, followed by all C<DESTROY>s that
do more than just reclaim memory, and so cannot be skipped because
they may have side effects visible outside the process.  If run from
an embedded interpreter, all memory must also be reclaimed.

Exit can also be called from an C<END> block: in that case only the C<$status>
to be returned to the calling environment, is changed.  This does end the
execution of the END block in question, but will still execute any remaining
C<END> blocks.

Any threads started with the C<:app_lifetime> parameter (which is basically
any asynchronous action started with primitives other than C<Thread.new>),
will be terminated on exit.

=item sleep

 multi sleep ( Real $for --> Nil )
 multi sleep ( Whatever --> Nil )

Attempt to sleep for up to C<$for> seconds, or forever when the argument is C<*>.
Implementations are obligated
to support sub-second resolutions if that is at all possible.  You may pass
any of C<Int>, C<Num>, C<Rat>, or C<Duration> types as an argument, since those
all do C<Real>, but regardless of which type you use, they are always scaled to
seconds.  (An implementation is allowed to provide access to a platform-specific
function based on, say, nanoseconds, but Perl 6 does not presume to know
how much resolution clocks will have in the future, so requires everything to
be specified in fractional seconds.)

This function returns nothing; use C<sleep-timer> if you wish it to
return how much time is remaining on the specified sleep.  However,
if you really just want to keep rolling over in bed until your alarm
goes off at a particular time, use C<sleep-till> instead, since it
is not subject to relative clock drift.

All of these sleep functions work only on the current thread.

=item sleep-timer

 multi sleep-timer ( Real $for --> Duration )

Just like C<sleep>, but returns the amount of time remaining to sleep
as a C<Duration> (which will be 0 if the call was not interrupted).
Depending on the platform and the system call involved, this may or
may not require emulation by interrogating the clock before and after.
For those systems whose system call returns the remaining time, this
can be more efficient than interrogating the clock twice yourself,
However, the optimizer is encouraged to change this to a bare C<sleep>
in sink context.  (But then, you might as well just write that in
the first place.)

=item sleep-till

 multi sleep-till ( Instant $till --> Bool )

Just like C<sleep>, but checks the current time and goes back to
sleep if accidentally woken up early, to guarantee waiting until the
specified time.  Returns True if the function actually waited, or if
the specified time happens to be the present moment.  Returns False
if you asked to sleep until a time in the past.

=item die

 multi die (@LIST)

Throws a fatal Exception. The default exception handler prints each element of
the list to $*ERR (STDERR).

=item fail

 multi fail (Str $message)

Can only be called inside a routine and causes the routine to C<return> an
unthrown exception; a C<Failure> object which stringifies to C<$message>.
If C<use fatal> is in effect where the routine was called from, it throws
the exception.

=back


=head2 Conversions

=over

=item bless

 method bless(*@protos, *%init_args )

Calling C<bless> on any invocant (but typically a type object) to create a new
object with the same class as the invocant.

The C<.bless> method takes the first positional argument indicating a
candidate to bless.  If absent, the object builder implicitly asks the
representation what its preferred, er, representation is.

C<bless> automatically creates an object appropriate to the
representation of the class, then calls all appropriate C<BUILD>
routines for the current class, which initializes the object in
least-derived to most-derived order. See L<S12/Objects> for more
detailed information on object creation.

=item chrs

=item ords

=item chr

=item ord

 multi sub chrs( Int *@grid  --> Str )
 multi method ords( Str $string: --> List of Int ) is export
 multi method chr( Int $grid: --> Str ) is export
 multi method ord( Str $string: --> Int ) is export

C<chrs> takes zero or more integer grapheme ids and returns the
corresponding characters as a string.  If any grapheme id is used
that represents a higher abstraction level than the current
lexical scope supports, that grapheme is converted to the
corresponding lower-level string of codepoints/bytes that would
be appropriate to the current pragmatic context, just as any other Str
would be downgraded in context.

C<ords> goes the other direction; it takes a string value and returns
character values as integers.  The definition of character is pragma dependent.
Normally it's a grapheme id, but under codepoints or bytes scopes,
the string is coerced to the appropriate low-level view and interpreted
as codepoints or bytes.  Hence, under "use bytes" you will never see a
value larger than 256, and under "use codepoints" you will probably never see a
value larger than 0x10ffff.  The only guarantee under "use graphemes"
(the default) is that the number returned will correspond to the
codepoint of the precomposed codepoint representing the grapheme, if
there is such a codepoint.  Otherwise, the implementation is free to
return any negative unique 32-bit id.  (The C<chr> function
will know how to backtranslate such ids properly to codepoints or
bytes in any context.  Note that we are assuming that every codepoint's
context knows its normalization preferences, and every byte's context
also knows its encoding preferences. (These are knowable in the
lexical scope via the $?NF and $?ENC compile-time constants).)

The C<chr> and C<ord> variants are restricted to processing a single
character.  As is customary, you may pass a longer string to C<ord>,
but only the first character will be translated.

=item item

 multi item ( $item --> Item )

Forces generic Item context on its argument, and returns it.

=item list

 multi list ( Iterable $item --> List ) { $item.iterator.list }
 multi list ( List \iter --> List ) { iter }

Almost a no-op; just makes sure that $item can be iterated.

=item flat

 multi flat ( *@list --> List )

Forces flat context on its arguments, and returns them.
The heavy work is done by the C<*@> binding.

=item lol

 multi lol ( **@list --> List )

Forces the argument list to be evaluated in lol ("list of lists") context.
(Subscripts treat such a list of lists as a multidimensional slice.)
Any sublist within the top level of the outer list will be transformed into an item (Scalar).
The work is actually done by the binding to the C<**@> parameter.
See also the more general C<.tree> method, which defaults to itemizing every level.

=item hash

The C<hash> contextualizer

 multi hash ( *@list --> Hash )

Forces the argument list to be evaluated in hash context.
The expression is evaluated in list context (flattening any C<Capture>s),
then a hash will be created from the list, taken as a list of C<Pair>s.
(Any element in the list that is not a C<Pair> will pretend to be a key
and grab the next value in the list as its value.)  Equivalent to
C<%()> (except that empty C<%()> means C<%($/)>, while
empty C<hash()> means an empty hash).

=item gist

 multi gist( |item --> Str )
 multi method gist( Mu $item: --> Str )

Produces an informal string coercion, something a human might want
to see if debugging, for instance.  Each type may decide its own
gist representation.  C<Mu.gist> just calls C<.perl>, but any type's
C<gist> method may override this to remove metainfo that a human
would find to be cluttery or redundant, or to format a composite value
with suitable whitespace to tell the bits apart, or to trim down an
infinite list to something slightly shorter.

C<gist> is used as a last-ditch string coercion on each individual
argument of various human-facing output routines, specifically
C<say>, C<note>, C<warn>, and any non-exceptional arguments to C<die>.
The C<print> function is specifically excluded, since it's outputting
to a printer. C<:-)>

=item :16, :8, :2, :10

 multi prefix:<:16> ( Str $hexstr --> Num )
 multi prefix:<:8> ( Str $octstr --> Num )
 multi prefix:<:2> ( Str $binstr --> Num )
 multi prefix:<:10> ( Str $decstr --> Num )
 etc.

Interprets string as a number, with a default
hexadecimal/octal/binary/decimal radix. Any radix prefix (0b, 0d, 0x, 0o)
mentioned inside the string will override this operator (this statement is true:
10 == :8("0d10")), except 0b and 0d will be interpreted as hex digits by :16
(C<hex("0d10") == :16 "0d10">).  C<fail>s on failure.

These aren't really functions, syntactically, but adverbial forms that
just happen to allow a parenthesize argument.  But more typically you'll
see

    :4<222>
    :16<deadbeef>

and such.

Replaces Perl 5 C<hex> and C<oct>.


=back


=head2 OS

=over

=item gethost

 multi gethost( --> OS::Name )
 multi gethost( Str $name, OS::Addfamily :$type --> OS::Name )
 multi method gethost( OS::Addr $addr: --> OS::Name ) is export
 multi method gethost( URI $uri: --> OS::Name ) is export

The C<gethost> function operates on host naming or address information
and returns an C<OS::Name>. An C<OS::Name> is, minimally:

 class OS::Name {
   has Str $.name;
   has OS::Addr $.addr;
   has Array of Str @.aliases;
   has Array of OS::Addr @.addrs;
 }

Such names can apply to anything which has a name that maps
to an address, however, in this case the name is a hostname
and the address is some sort of network identifier (e.g.
an IPV4 address when resolving hosts that have IPV4 addresses).

When stringified, an C<OS::Name> yields its name. When
stringified, an C<OS::Addr> yields its address in an
appropriate text format (e.g. "10.1.2.3" for an IPV4 address).

The optional C<type> adverb can be passed when resolving a hostname,
and will filter the result to only those addresses that are of
the appropriate address family. This feature may be supported by
the underlying operating system, or Perl may emulate it.

Examples:

  say "Connection from {$socket.peer.gethost}";
  my $address = gethost("foo.example.com").addr;
  my $hostname = gethost(:addr<"10.1.2.3">);

=item chroot

 multi chroot ( Str $path = CALLER::<$_> --> Bool )

On POSIX systems, changes the process context of the current process such
that the "root" directory becomes C<$path> and all rooted paths
(those that begin with a leading path separator) are relative to
that path. For security reasons, many operating systems limit
this functionality to the superuser. The return value will be
true on success.

=item getlogin

 multi getlogin ( --> Str )

Returns the username of the account running the program. This may
not be as secure as using C<getpwuid> on some platforms.

=item kill

 multi kill ( OS::Signal $signal, Bool :$group, *@pids --> Bool )
 multi method kill ( Proc::PID $pid: OS::Signal $signal?, Bool :$group --> Bool )

Sends the given C<$signal> to the process(es) given and returns a boolean
value indicating success (true) if all of the processes existed and were
sent the signal and failure (false) if any of the processes did not exist
or the signal could not be delivered to them.

The C<$signal> can be initialized from an integer signal number or a
string. Common signals are:

 KILL - stop the process, do not allow it to exit gracefully
 TERM - stop the process, allow it to exit gracefully
 HUP  - Hangup, often used as a request to re-run from scratch
 STOP - Pause execution
 CONT - Continue after a STOP

Consult your operating system documentation for the full list
of signal names and numbers. For compatibility, a signal name
may be prefixed with "SIG".

The method form may omit the signal. In this case, the default signal is
C<'TERM'>.

If the C<:group> named parameter is passed, C<kill> will attempt to
send the signal to a process I<group> rather than a single process.
This functionality is platform-specific.

The special signal C<0> can be sent which does not actually deliver a
signal at all, and is used to determine if processes are still running:

  say "Still running" if $proc.kill(0);

=item run

=item shell


 multi shell ( $expression,   :$cwd = $CWD, :%env = %*ENV --> Proc )
 multi run   ( *$cmd, *@args, :$cwd = $CWD, :%env = %*ENV --> Proc )

C<shell> and C<run> execute an external program, and return control to
the caller once the program has exited.

C<shell> goes through the system shell (C<cmd> on windows, C</bin/sh>
on Unixish systems), thus interpreting all the usual shell meta characters.

C<run> treats the first argument as an executable name, and the rest of the
positional arguments as command line arguments that are passed to the
executable without any processing (except that it encodes Strings to buffers
first, as does C<shell>).

Both return a C<Proc> object, which boolifies to C<True> if the program had
a successful exit and C<False> otherwise. The C<status> method on a C<Proc>
provides the exit code. If a C<False> C<Proc> is sunk, an exception will be
thrown of type C<X::Proc::Unsuccessful>.

If you want to execute an external program asynchronously (as in, not waiting
for it to be finished), you will need C<Proc::Async>, as specced in
L<S17-concurrency>.

=item runinstead

 multi runinstead ( ; Str $path, *@args )
 multi runinstead ( ; Str $command )

Identical to C<run> except that it never returns. The executed program
replaces the currently running program in memory.

=item syscall

=back

=head2 Concurrency

There are higher-level models of concurrency management in Perl (see
L<S17/Concurrency>). These functions are simply the lowest level
tools

=over

=item fork

 sub Processes::fork( --> Proc )

Creates a copy of the current process. Both processes return from
C<fork>. The original process returns
the I<child> process as a C<Proc> object. The newly created process
returns the I<parent> process as a C<Proc> object. As with
any Proc object, the child process object numifies to the
process ID (OS dependent integer). However, the parent process object
numifies to C<0> so that the child and parent can distinguish each other.

Typical usage would be:

 if !defined(my $pid = fork) {
   die "Error calling fork: $!";
 } elsif $pid == 0 {
   say "I am the new child!";
   exit 0;
 } else {
   say "I am the parent of {+$pid}";
   wait();
 }

=item wait

 multi method wait( Proc $process: *%options --> Proc::Status )

 multi wait ( Proc $process = -1, *%options --> Proc::Status )

Waits for a child process to terminate and returns the status
object for the child.  This status object will numify to the process
ID of the child that exited.

Important Proc::Status methods:

 .exit - Numeric exit value
 .pid - Process ID
 .signal - Signal number if any, otherwise 0

For historical reasons there is a C<.status> method which is equal to:

 ($status.exit +< 8) +| $status.signal

If C<$process> is supplied, then wait will only return when the given process
has exited. Either a full C<Proc> object can be passed, or just a
numeric process ID. A C<-1> explicitly indicates that wait should return
immediately if any child process exits.

When called in this way, the returned C<Proc::Status> object
will have a C<.pid> of C<-1> (which is also what it numifies to) if
there was no such process to wait for.

The named options include:

=over

=item blocking

Defaults to true. If set to false, this forces wait to return immediately.

=item WNOHANG

Exists for historical compatibility. C<WNOHANG => 1> is identical to
C<blocking => False>.

=back

=back

=head2 Pending Apocalypse

The following functions are classified by Apocalypse/Synopsis numbers.

=over 4

=item A/S??: OS Interaction

chroot crypt getlogin /[get|set][pw|gr].*/ kill setpgrp setpriority
times

... These are probably going to be part of POSIX, automatically imported to GLOBAL B<if> the platform is the right one

=back

=head2 Default Functions

These functions are exported into the default namespace

=over

=item all -- see S32-setting-library/Containers.pod

=item any -- see S32-setting-library/Containers.pod

=item cat -- see S32-setting-library/Containers.pod

=item categorize -- see S32-setting-library/Containers.pod

=item classify -- see S32-setting-library/Containers.pod

=item defined -- see S32-setting-library/Basics.pod

=item grep -- see S32-setting-library/Containers.pod

=item first -- see S32-setting-library/Containers.pod

=item join -- see S32-setting-library/Containers.pod

=item keys -- see S32-setting-library/Containers.pod

=item kv -- see S32-setting-library/Containers.pod

=item map -- see S32-setting-library/Containers.pod

=item max -- see S32-setting-library/Containers.pod

=item min -- see S32-setting-library/Containers.pod

=item none -- see S32-setting-library/Containers.pod

=item one -- see S32-setting-library/Containers.pod

=item pairs -- see S32-setting-library/Containers.pod

=item pick -- see S32-setting-library/Containers.pod

=item print -- see S32-setting-library/IO.pod

=item printf -- see S32-setting-library/IO.pod

=item reduce -- see S32-setting-library/Containers.pod

=item reverse -- see S32-setting-library/Containers.pod

=item roundrobin -- see S32-setting-library/Containers.pod

=item say -- see S32-setting-library/IO.pod

=item shape -- see S32-setting-library/Containers.pod

=item sort -- see S32-setting-library/Containers.pod

=item srand -- see S32-setting-library/Numeric.pod

=item undefine -- see S32-setting-library/Basics.pod

=item uri -- see S32-setting-library/IO.pod

=item values -- see S32-setting-library/Containers.pod

=item warn -- see S32-setting-library/Any.pod

=item zip -- see S32-setting-library/Containers.pod

=back

=head2 Non-default Functions

These functions which existed in Perl 5 still exist but are not part of the default
namespace any more.

=head3 Container

The following functions can now be found in or replaced by something in the Container
modules.

delete, exists, pop, push, shift, splice, unshift

=head3 Numeric

See L<S32/Numeric>.

=head3 IO

The following functions can now be found in or replaced by something in the IO
modules.

accept, bind, binmode, chdir, chmod, chown, close, closedir, connect
eof, fcntl, fileno, flock, getc, getsockname, getsockopt, glob, ioctl, link, listen
lstat, mkdir, open, opendir, pipe, print, printf, read, readdir, readline, readlink
readpipe, recv, rename, rewinddir, rmdir, say, seek, seekdir, select, send, setsockopt
shutdown, socket, socketpair, stat, symlink, sysopen, sysread, sysseek
syswrite, tell, telldir, truncate, umask, unlink

=head3 Temporal

The following functions can now be found in or replaced by something in the Temporal
modules.

gmtime, localtime, time

=head3 String

The following functions can now be found in or replaced by something in the String
module.

chop, chomp, index, lc, pack, rindex, split, sprintf, substr, uc,
ucfirst, unpack

=head2 Obsolete Functions

Some of these are obsoleted only as general functions, and are still available by using
the right packages.  Others are obsoleted in that they're keywords, rather than functions
(these are in their own section, below).

=over 4

=item %

 $num1 % $num2

Does a floating point modulo operation, i.e. 5.5 % 1 == 0.5 and 5 % 2.5 == 0.

=item dbmopen, dbmclose

 use DB_File;

=item dump

Dumped.  Restoring from core dumps is in any event not very useful on modern
virtual-memory operating systems.  Startup acceleration should be accomplished
using a precompiler of some kind (details will be very implementation specific),
or a pre-forking daemon such as Perl 5's App::Persistent (which will be an
external module when it is ported).

=item each

See .pairs() method, above.

=item endpwent, endgrent, endservent, endprotoent, endnetent, endhostent

The NameServices role in S16 covers most of these.

=item format, formline

See Exegesis 7.

=item getgrgid, getgrnam, getpwnam, getpwuid

The User and Group roles in S16 cover most of these.

=item getpwent, getgrent, getservent, getnetent, gethostent

The NameServices role in S16 covers most of these.

=item length()

This word is banned in Perl 6.  You must specify units.  In practice, this probably means
you want Str.chars(), although it could be Str.bytes(), or even something else.  See
S32-setting-library/String for details.

=item lcfirst

Retired due to lack of use case

=item msgctl, msgget, msgrcv, msgsnd

See IPC::SysV

=item local

Replaced by C<temp> which, unlike C<local>, defaults to not changing the value.

=item lock

See L<S17/Concurrency>. C<lock> has been replaced by C<Lock.new> and methods
on the C<Lock> object.

=item quotemeta

Because regex escaping metacharacters can easily be solved by quotes
(L<S05/Simplified lexical parsing of patterns>), and variables are not
automatically interpolated (L<S05/Variable (non-)interpolation>), C<quotemeta>
is no longer needed.

Shell escaping should be handled by passing arguments to L<run>, or with code
that speaks the language of a specific shell.

=item pos

There is no C<pos> function in Perl 6 because that would not allow a string
to be shared among threads.  Generally you want to use C<$/.to> for that now,
or keep your own position variable as a lexical.

=item prototype

 &func.meta.signature;
 &func.^signature;

=item ref

There is no ref() any more, since it was almost always used to get
the type name in Perl 5.  If you really want the type name, you can
use C<$var.WHAT.perl>.  If you really want P5 ref
semantics, use C<Perl5::p5ref>.

But if you're just wanting to test against a type, you're likely better off
performing an C<isa> or C<does> or C<can>, or just C<$var ~~ TYPE>.

=item reset

Was there a I<good> use for this?

=item semctl, semget, semop

See IPC::SysV;

=item setpwent, setgrent, setservent, setprotoent, setnetent, sethostent

The NameServices role in S16 covers most of these.

=item shmctl, shmget, shmread, shmwrite

See IPC::SysV;

=item study

Algorithm was too Anglo-centric.  Could be brought back if generalized somehow.

=item tie, tied

These are replaced by container types.  The compiler is free to assume
that any lexical variable is never going to change its container type
unless some representation is made to that effect in the declaration.
Note: P5's tied() is roughly replaced by P6's variable().

XXX Examples?

my $foo is ....? is tie
the meta operation on the container type for 'rebless' -
macro tie ( $var, $class, *@args ) { CODE { variable($var).meta.rebless( $class, *@args ) } } )

endXXX

=item untie

See notes on "tie", above, but basically these are replaced with container classes.

=item vec

Should replace C<vec> with declared buffer/array of C<bit>, C<uint2>,
C<uint4>, etc.

=item waitpid

C<wait> can now be called with or without an optional process/pid.

=item write

See Exegesis 7.

=back

=head3 Keywords

The following were listed in Perl 5's perlfunc, but should now be considered keywords
rather than functions.

last, my, next, no, our, package, return, sub, use

=head1 Default Export Questions

Not sure whether these are exported by default or not.  Also, many may no longer exist; if
so, they should be entered in the "Obsolete" section.

=over

=item Signal-related

alarm
kill

=item OS or library related

 chroot
 crypt
 getlogin
 getpeername -- should this go on Pipe?

OS objects:

 --Process
 getpgrp
 getppid
 getpriority
 setpgrp
 setpriority

 --Service
 getservbyname
 getservbyport

 --Protocol
 getprotobyname
 getprotobynumber

 --Network
 getnetbyaddr
 getnetbyname

 --Host
 gethostbyaddr
 gethostbyname

=item Flow control

succeed
proceed
redo

=item Other

caller
chr
die
do
EVAL
exec
exit
fork
goto
hex
import
int
oct
ord
require
scalar
sleep
state
syscall
system
times
utime
wait

=back

=head1 AUTHORS

    Rod Adams <rod@rodadams.net>
    Larry Wall <larry@wall.org>
    Aaron Sherman <ajs@ajs.com>
    Mark Stosberg <mark@summersault.com>
    Carl Mäsak <cmasak@gmail.com>
    Moritz Lenz <moritz@faui2k3.org>
    Tim Nelson <wayland@wayland.id.au>
    Carlin Bingham <carlin@theintersect.org>
    Elizabeth Mattijsen <liz@wenzperl.nl>
    Brent Laabs <bslaabs@gmail.com>

=for vim:set expandtab sw=4:
